--- Page 1 ---
THE MAGIC 
OFTHINKING 
. 
DAVID J. ~CHWARTZ, PH.D. 
A FIRESIDE BOOK 
Published by Sint01.t & Sc1lUster . 
New York London Toronto Sydney 

--- Page 2 ---
I FIRESIDE 
Rockefeller Center 
1230 Avenue of the_Americas 
New York, NY 10020 
Copyright © 1959, 1965 by Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
Al! rights reserved, 
including the right of reproduction 
in whole or in part in any form. 
This Fireside Edition 2007 
Fireside and colophon are registered trademarks 
of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 
Por information regarding special discounts for bulk purchases, 
please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-800-456-6798 
or business@simonandschuster.com. 
Designed by Mary Austin Speaker 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
80 79 78 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Schwartz, David Joseph. 
The magic of thinking big / David Joseph Schwartz. 
p. em. 
"A Fireside booK." 
Includes index. 
1. Success. L Title. 
BP637.S86S36 1987 
-158'.1--dc19 87-8516 
ISBN-13: 978-0-671-64678-3 
ISBN-IO: 0-671-64678-8 

--- Page 3 ---
Fof David III 
Our six-year-old son, David, felt mighty big when he was graduated 
from kindergarten. 1 asked him what he plans to be when he 
Hnishes growing up. Davey looked at me intently for a moment and 
then answered, "Dad, 1 want to be a professor." 
'J\. professor? A professor of what?" 1 asked. 
"Well, Dad," he replied, "I think 1 want to be a professor of 
happiness." 
'J\. professor of happiness! That's a pretty wonderful ambition, 
don't you think?" 
To David, then, a fme boy with a grand goal, and to his 
mother, this book is dedicated. 

--- Page 4 ---


--- Page 5 ---
CONTENTS 
Preface 1 
What This Book Will Do for You 5 
1 , Believe You Can Succeed an-d You Will 9 
2, Cure Yourself of Excusitis, the Failure Disease 25 
3, Build Confidence and Destroy Fear 49 
4, How to Think Big 75 
5, How to Think and Dream Creatively 100 
6, You Are What You Think You Are 126 
7, Manage Your EnvironmeHt: Go First Class 146 
8, Make Your Attitudes Your Allies 166 
9, Think Right Toward People 192 
10, Get the Action Habit 212 
11 , How to Tum Defeat into Victory 235 
12, Use Goals to Help You Grow 252 
13, How to Think like a Leader 275 
Index 303 

--- Page 6 ---


--- Page 7 ---
PREFACE 
Why this big book? Why a full-scale discussion of The Magic of 
Thinking Big? Thousands of-books will be published this year. Why 
·one more? 
Permit me to give yon just a little background. 
Several years ago I witnessed an exceptionally impressive 
sales meeting. The vice president in charge of marketing for this 
company was tremendously excited. He wanted to drive home 
a point. He had with him on the platform the leading represen­
~ative in the organization, a vety ordinary-looking fellow, who 
earned in the year just ended just a little under $60,000. The earn­
ings of other representatives averaged $12,000. 
The executive challenged the group. Here is what he said: "I 
want you to take a good look at Harry. Look at him! Now, what's 
Harry got that the rest of you haven't? Harry earned five times 
the average, but is Harry five times smarter? No, not according 
to our personnel tests. I checked. They show he's about avet:age 
in that department. 
'lilld did Harry work five times harder than you fellows? 
No-not according ro the reports. In fact, he took more time off 
than most of yon. 
[ 

--- Page 8 ---
2 PREfAGE 
"Did Harry have a better territory? Again I've got to say no. 
The accounts averaged about the same. Did Harry have more 
education? Better health? Again, no. Harry is about as average as 
an average guy could be except for one thing. 
"The difterence between Harry and the rest of you," said 
the vice president, "the difference is that Harry thought five 
times bigger." 
Then the executive proceeded to show that success is deter­
mined not so much by the size of one's brain as it is by the size 
of one's thinking. 
This was an intriguing thought. And it stayed with me. The 
more I observed, the more people I talked with, the deeper I dug 
into what's really behind success, the clearer was the answer. 
Case history after case history proved that the size of bank 
accounts, the size of happiness accounts, and the size of one's 
general satisfaction account is dependent on the size of one's think­
ing. There is magic in thinking big. 
"If Thinking Big accomplishes so much, why doesn't every­
one think that way?" I've been asked that question many times. 
Here, I believe, is the answer. All of us, more than we recognize, 
are products of the thinking around us. And much of this thinking 
is little, not big. All around you is an environment that is trying 
to tug you, trying to pull you down Second Class Street. You are 
told almost daily that there are "too many chiefs and not enough 
Indians." In other words, that opportunities to lead no longer exist, 
that there is a surplus of chiefs, so be content to be a little guy. 
But this "too many chiefs" idea simply doesn't square with 
the truth. Leading people in all occupations will tell you, as 
they've told me, that "the trouble is, there are too many Indians 
and not nearly enough chiefs." 

--- Page 9 ---
PREFACE 3 
This pettily petty environment says other things too. It 
tells you; "Whatever will be will be," that your destiny is outside 
your control, that "fate" is in complete control. So forget those 
dreams, forget that finer home, forget that special college for the 
children, forgft the better life. Be· resigned. Lie down and wait 
to die. 
And who hasn't heard the statement that "Success, isn't 
worth the price," as if you have to sell your soul, your family 
life, your conscience, your set of values to reach the top. But, in 
truth, success doesn't demand a price. Every step forward pays 
a dividend. 
This environment also tells us there's too much competi­
tion for the top spots in life. But is there? A personnel selection 
.executive told me that he receives 50 to 250 times as many 
applicants for jobs that pay $10,000 per year as for jobs that pay 
$50,000 a year. This is to say that there is at least 50 times as much 
competition for jobs on Second Class Street as for jobs on First 
Class Avenue. First Class Avenue, U.S.A., is a short, uncrowded 
street. There are countless vacancies waiting there for people like 
you who dare to think big. 
The basic principles and concepts supporting The Magic of 
Thinking Big come from the highest-pedigree sources, the very fm­
est and biggest-thinking minds yet to live on planet Earth. Minds 
like the prophet David, who wrote, '1\.s one thinketh in his heart, 
so is he"; minds such as Emerson, who said, "Great men are those 
who see that thoughts rule the world"; minds like Milton, who in 
Paradise Lost wrote, "The mind is its own place and in itself can 
make a heaven of hell or a hell of heaven." Amazingly perceptive 
minds like Shakespeare, who observed, "There is nothing either 
good or bad except that thinking makes it so." 

--- Page 10 ---
4 PREFACE 
But where does the proof come from? How do we know 
the master thinkers were right, Fair questions. The pl'Oof comes 
from the lives of the select people al'Ound us who, thl'Ough win­
ning success, achievement, and happiness, pl'Ove that thinking 
big does work magic. 
The simple steps we have set down here are not untested 
theories. They are not one man's guesses and opinions. They are 
proven appl'Oaches to life's situations, and they are universally 
applicable steps that work and work like magic. 
That you're reading this page pl'Oves you are interested in 
larger success. You want to fulfill your desires. You want to enjoy 
a fine standard of living. You want this life to deliver to you all 
the good things you deserve. Being interested in success is a 
wonderful quality. 
You have another admirable quality. The fact that you're 
holding this book in your hands shows you have the intelligence 
to look for tools that will help take you where you want to go. 
In building anything-automobiles, bridges, missiles-we need 
tools. Many people, in their attempt to build a successful life, 
forget there are tools to help them. You have not forgotten. You 
have, then, the two basic qualities needed to realize real profit 
from this book: a desire for greater success and the intelligence 
to select a tool to help you realize that desire. 
Think Big and you'll live big. You'll live big in happiness. 
You'll live big in accomplishment. Big·in income. Big in friends. 
Big in respect. 
Enough for the promise. 
Start now, right now, to discover how to make your think­
ing make magic for you. Start out with this thought of the great 
philosopher Disraeli: "Life is too short to be little." 

--- Page 11 ---
WHAT THIS BOOK 
WI LL DO FOR YOU 
In every chapter of this book you will fmd dozens of hardheaded, 
practical ideas, techniques, and principles that will' enable you to 
harness the tremendous power of thinking big, so as to gain for 
yourself the success, happiness, and satisfaction you want so much. 
Every technique is dramatically illustrated by a real·life case history. 
You discover not only what to do, but, what is even more important, 
you see exactly how to apply each principle to actual situations and 
problems. Here, then, is what this book will do for you; it will show 
you how you can ... 
Launch Yourself to Success with 
the Power of Belief 9 
Win Success by Believilig You Can 
Succeed 19 
Defeat Disbelief and the Negative 
Power It Creates 12 
Get Big Results by Believing Big 
14 
Make Your Mind Produce Positive 
Thoughts 18 Develop the Power of Belief 20 
Plan a Concrete Success·Building 
Program 22 
Vaccinate Yourself Against 
EXCllsitis, the Failure Disease 
29 
Learn the Secret That Lies in Your 
Attitude Toward Health 27 
Take Four Positive Steps to Lick 
. Health Excusitis 31 

--- Page 12 ---
6 WHATTHIS BOOK WILL DO FOR YOU 
Discover Why Your Thiuking 
Power Is More Important Than 
Mere Intelligence 32 
Use Your Mind for Thinking-Not 
Simply as a Warehouse for Facts 
37 
Master TItree Easy Ways to Cure 
Intelligence Excusitis 38 
Overcome the Problem of Age­
BeiHg "Too Young,» or "Too 
Old" 39 
Conquer Luck Excusitis and Attract 
Good Luck to You 45 
Use the Action Technique to Cure 
Fear and Build Confidence 50 
Manage Your Memory so as to 
Increase Your Store of Confi­
dence 55 
. Overcome Your Fear of Other 
People 61 
Increase Selfconfidence by Satisfy­
ing Your O\vn Conscience 64 
Think Confidelttly by Acting Confi­
delttly 68 
. Learn the Five Positive Steps to 
Build Confidence and Destroy 
Fear 74 
Discover That Success Is Measured 
by the Size of Your Thinking 
76 Measure Your True Size and Find 
Out What Assets You Have 
77 
Think as Big as You Really Are 
79 
Develop the Big Thinker's Vocabu­
lary with These Four Specific 
Steps 81 
Think Big by Visualizing What 
Can Be Done in the Future 82 
Add Value to Things, to People, 
and to Yourself 89 
Get the "TIlinking Big" VieW of 
Your Job 90 
Think Above Trivialities and Con­
centrate on What's Important. 
77 
Test Yourself-Find Out How Big 
Your Thinking Really Is 
97 
Use Creative Thinking to Find New 
and Better Ways to Get Things 
Done 100 
Develop Creative Power by Believ­
ing It Can Be Done 105 
Fight Mind-Freezing Tra4itioual 
Thinking, 106 
Do More and Do It Better by Turn­
ing on Your Creative Power 
107 

--- Page 13 ---
Use the Three Keys to Strengthen­
ing Creativity by Opening Your 
Ears and Your Mind 118 
Stretch Your Thinking a/1d Stimu­
late Your Mind 118 
Harness and Develop Your 
Ideas-the Fruit of Your Think­
ing 120 
Look Important, Because It Helps 
You Think Important 127 
Become Important by Thinking 
Your Work Is Important 132 
Build Your Own "Sell-Yourself to­
Yourself" Commercial 141 
Upgrade Your Thinking-Think 
Like Important People Think 
144 
Make Your Environment Work for 
You 117 
Prevent Small People from Holding 
You Back 151 
Manage Your Work Environment 
154 
Get Plenty of Psychological Sun­
shine During Leisure Hours 
157 
Throw Thought Poison Out of 
Your Environment 161 
Go First Class in Everything 
You Do 163 WHATTHIS BOOK WILL 00 FOR YOU 7 
Grow the Attitlldes That Will Help 
You Win What You Want 168 
Get Activated; Get Enthusiastic 
168 
Develop the Power of Real Enthusi­
asm 169 
Grow the "You-Are-Important" 
Attitude 177 
Make More Money by Getting the 
"Put-Service-First" Attitllde 
186 
Win the Support of Other People 
by Thinking Right Toward 
Them 192 
Become More Likable by Making 
Yourself "Lighterto LijI" 194 
Take the Initiative in Building 
Friendships 197 
Master the Technique of TIlink­
ing Only Good Thoughts About 
People 202 
Win Friends by Practicing Conver­
sation Generosity 207 
Think Big, Even Wheil You Lose or 
Receive a Setback 209 
Get the Action Habit-You Don't 
Need to Wait Until Conditions 
Are Perftct 212 
Make Up Your Mind to Do Some­
thing About Your Ideas. 221 

--- Page 14 ---
8 WHATTHIS BOOK WILL DO FOR YOU 
Use Action to Cure Fear and Gaia 
Confidence 222 
Discover the Secret of Mind Action 
223 
Capitalize on the Magic of NOW 
226 
Strengthen Yourself by Getting the 
"Speak Up" Habit 228 
Develop Initiative, a Special Kind 
of Action 229 
Discover That Deftat Is Nothiug 
More Than a State of Mind 
236 
Salvage Somethingfrom Every Set­
back 237 
Use the Force of Constructive Self­
criticism 243 
Achieve Positive Results Through 
Persistence and Experimenta­
tion 245 
Whip Discouragemel1t by Finding 
the Good Side to Every Situa­
tion 249 
Get a Clear Fix on Where You 
Want to Go in Life 252 
Use This Plan to Build Your Tw­
Year Goal 255 
Avoid the Five Success-Murdering 
Weapons 259 Multiply Your EnClg)' by Setting 
Definite Goals 260 
Set Goals That Will Help You Get 
Things Done and Live Longer 
261 
Accomplish Your Goals with This 
30-Day Improvement Guide 
268 
Invest in Yourself for Future Profit 
270 
Learn the Four Rules of Leader­
ship 275 
Develop Your Power to Trade 
Minds with the People You 
Want to fllIluence 280 
Put the "Be-Human" Approach to 
Work for You 282 
Think Progress, Believe in Progress, 
Push for Progress 288 
Test Yourself to Learn Whether 
You Are a Progressive Thinker 
293 
Tap Your Supreme Thinking Power 
295 
Use the Magic of Thinking Big in 
Lift's Most Crucial Situations 
300 

--- Page 15 ---
1 
BELIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED AND YOU WILL 
SIJCCESS 1'/iE/\f\J~; 1Vl;\NY WONOFf\f'UL, positive things. Success 
means personal prosperity: a fine home, vacations, travel, new 
things, fmandal security, giving your children maximum advan­
tages. Success means winning admiration, leadership, being 
looked up to by people in your business and sodallife. Success 
means freedom: freedom fium worries, fears, frustrations, and 
failure. Success means self-respect, conrinually fmdirig more real 
happiness and satisfaction from life, being able to do more for 
those who depend on you. 
Success means winning. 
Success~achievement~is the goal of life! 
Every human being wants success. Everybody wants the 
. best this life can deliver. Nobody enjoys crawling, living in medi­
ocrity. No one likes feeling second-class and feeling forced to go 
that way. 
Some of the most practical suq:ess-building wisdom is found 
in that biblical quotation stating that faith can move mountains. 
Believe, really believe, you can move a mountain, an~ you 
can. Not many people believe that they can move mountains. So, 
as a result, not many people do. 

--- Page 16 ---
10 BElIEVE YOU CAli SUCCEED AIID YOU WILL 
On some occasion you've probably heard someone say 
something like "It's nonsense to think you can make a mountain 
move away just by saying 'Mountain, move away.' It's simply 
impossible." 
People who think this way have belief confused with wish­
ful thinking. And true enough, you can't wish away a mountain. 
You can't wish yourself into an executive suite. Nor can you 
.wish yourself into a five-bedroom, three-bath house or the 
high-income brackets. You can't wish yourself into a position of 
leadership. 
But you can move a mountain with belief. You can win suc­
cess by believing you can succeed. 
There is nothing magical or mystical about the power of 
belief. 
Belief works this way. Belief, the 'Tm-positive-I-can" atti­
tude, generates the power, skill, and energy needed to do. When 
you believe I-can-do-it, the how-to-do-it develops. 
Every day all over the nation young people start working in 
new jobs. Each of them "wishes" that someday he could enjoy 
the success that goes with reaching the top. But the majority of 
these young people simply don't have the belief that it takes to 
reach the top rungs. And they don't reach the tOp. Believing it's 
impossibl~ to climb high, they do not discover the steps that lead 
to great heights. Theil' behavior remains that of the "average" 
person. 
But a small number of these young people really believe they 
will succeed. They approach their work with the 'Tm-going-to­
the-top" attitude. And with substantial belief they reach the top. 
Believing they will succeed-and that it's not impossible-these 
folks study and observe the behavior of senior executives. They 

--- Page 17 ---
BELIEVE YOU CAli SUCCEED AND YOU Will 11 
learn how successful people approach problems and make deci­
sions. They observe the attitudes of successful people. 
The how-to-do-it always comes to the person who believes 
. he can do it. 
A young woman I'm acquainted with decided two years 
ago that she was going to establish a sales agency to sell mobile 
homes. She was advised by many that she shouldn't-and 
couldn't-do it. 
She had less than $3,000 in savings and was advised that the 
minimum capital investment required was many times that. 
"Look how competitive it is," she was advised. "And besides, 
what practical experience have you had in selling mobile homes, 
let alone managing a business?" her advisors asked. 
But this young lady had belief in herself and her ability to 
succeed. She quickly admitted that she lacked capital, that the 
business was very competitive, and that she lacked experience. ' 
"But," she said, "all the evidence I can gather shows that the 
mobile home industry is going to expand. On top of that, I've 
studied my competition. I know I can do a better job of merchan­
dising trailers than anybody else in this town. I expect to make 
some mistakes, but I'm going to be on top in a hurry." , 
And she was. She had little trouble getting capital. Her 
absolutely unquestioned belief that she could succeed with this 
business won her the confidence of two investors. And armed 
with complete belief, she did the "impossible" -she got a trailer 
manufacturer to advance her a limited inventory with no money 
down. 
Last year she sold over $1,OOO,pOO worth of trailers. 
"Next year," she says, "I expect to gross over $2,000,000." 
Belief, strong belief, triggers the mind to figure ways and 

--- Page 18 ---
12 BELIEVE YOU CAlI SUCCEED AlID YOU WILL 
means and how-to. And believing you can succeed makes others 
place confidence in you. 
Most people do not put much stock in belief. But some, the 
residents of Successfulville, U.S.A., do! Just a few weeks ago a 
friend who is an oftlcial with a state highway department in a mid­
western state related a "mountain-moving" experience to me. 
"Last month," my friend began, "our department sent 
notices to a number of engineering companies that we were 
authorized to retain some firm to design eight bridges as part of 
our highway-building program. The bridges were to be built at a 
cost of $5,000,000. The engineering firm selected would get a 4 
percent commission, o'r $200,000, for its design work. 
"I talked with twenty-one engineering firms about this. 
The four largest decided right away to submit proposals. The 
other seventeen companies were small, having ,only three to 
seven engineers each. The size of the project scared off sixteen 
of these seventeen, They went over the project, shook their 
heads, and said, in effect, 'It's too big for us. I wish I thought we 
could handle it, but it's no use even trying: 
"But one of these small firms, a company with only three 
engineers, studied the plans and said, 'We can do it. We'll submit 
a proposal.' They did, and they got the job," 
Those who believe they can move' mountains, do, Those 
who believe'they can't, cannot, Belief triggers the powe'r to do. 
Actually, in these modern tim~s belief is doing much bigger 
things than moving mountains. The most essential element-in 
fact, the essential element-in our space explorations today is 
belief that space can be mastered, Without firm, unwavering 
belief that man can travel in space, our scientists would not 
have the courage, interest, and enthusiasm to proceed. Belief 

--- Page 19 ---
BElIEVE YOU CAli SUCCEED ArID YOU Will 13 
that cancer can be cured will ultimately produce cures for can-. 
eel'. Currently, there is some talk of building a tunnel under 
the English Channel to connect England with the Continent. 
Whether this tunnel is ever built depends on whether responsible 
people believe it can be built. 
Belief in great results is the driving force, the power behind 
all great books, plays, scientific discoveries. Belief in success is 
behind every successful business, church, and political organiza­
tion. Belief in success is the one basic, absolutely essential ingre­
dient of successful people. 
Believe, really believe, you can succeed, and you will. 
Over the years I've talked with many people who have 
failed in business ventures and in various careers. I've heard a lot 
of reasons and excuses for failure. Something especially signifi­
cant unfolds as conversations with failures develop. In a casual 
sort of way the failure drops a remark like "To tell the truth, 
I didn't think it would work" or "I had my misgivings before I 
even started out" or '1\ctually, I wasn't too surprised that it didn't 
work out." 
The "Okay-I' ll-give-it -a -try-but -I -don't -think-it -will-work" 
attitude produces failures. 
Disbelief is negative power. When the mind disbelieves 
or doubts, the mind attracts "reasons" to support the disbelief. 
Doubt, disbelief, the subconsciolls will to fail, the not really wanting 
to succeed, is responsible for most failures. 
Think doubt and fail. 
Think victory and succeed. 
A young fiction writer talked with me recently about her 
writing ambitions. The name of one of the top writers in her 
field came up. 

--- Page 20 ---
14 BELIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED ArID YOU Will 
"Gh," she said, "Mr. X is a wonderful writer, but of course, 
I can't be nearly as successful as he is." 
Her attitude disappointed me very much because I know 
the writer mentioned. He is not sllperintelligent nor super­
perceptive, nor super-anything else except superconfident. He 
believes he is among the best, and so he acts and performs the 
best. 
It is well to respect the leader. Learn from him. Observe 
him. Study him. But don't worship him. Believe you can surpass. 
Believe you can go beyond. Those who harbor the second-best 
attitude are invariably second-best doers. 
Look at it this way. Belief is the thermostat that regulates 
what we accomplish in life. Study the fellow who is shuffling 
down there in mediocrity. He believes he is worth little, so he 
receives little. He believes he can't do big things, and he doesn't. 
He believes he is unimponant, so everything he does has an 
unimportant mark. As times goes by, lack of belief in himself 
shows through in the way the fellow talks, walks, acts. Unless he 
readjusts his thermostat forward, he shrinks, grows smaller and 
smaller, in his own estimation. And, since others see in us what 
we see in ourselves, he grows smaller in the estimation of the 
. people around him. 
Now look across the way at the person who is advancing 
forward. He believes he is wonh much, and he receives much. 
He believes he can handle big, difficult assiguments-and he 
does. Everything he does, the way he handles himself with 
people, his character, his thoughts, his viewpoints, all say, "Here 
is a professional. He is an important person." 
A. person is a product of his own thoughts. Believe Big. 
Adjust your thermostat forward. Launch your success offensive 

--- Page 21 ---
BELIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED AND YOU Will 15 
with honest, sincere belief that you can succeed. Believe big and 
grow big. 
Several years ago after addressing a group of businessmen 
in Detroit, I talked with one of the gentlemen who approached 
me, introduced himself, and said, "I really enjoyed your talk. Can 
you spare a few minutes? I'd like very much to discuss a personal 
experience with you." 
In a few minutes we were comfortably seated in a coffee 
shop, waiting for some refreshment~. 
"I have a personal experience," he began, "that ties in per­
fectly with what you said this evening abput making your mind 
work for you instead of letting it work agai~st you. I've never 
explained to anyone how I lifted myself out of the world of 
mediocrity, but I'd like to tell you about it." 
''And I'd like to heal' it," I said. 
"Well, just five years ago I was plodding along, just another 
guy working in the tool-and-die trade. I made a decent living 
by average standards. But it was far from ideal. Our home was 
much too small, aid there was no money for those many things 
we wanted. My wife, bless her, didn't complain much, but it was 
written all over her that she was more resigned to her fate than 
she was happy. Inside I grew more and more dissatisfied. When I 
let myself see how I was failing my good wife and two children, 
I really hurt inside. 
"But today things are really different," my friend continued. 
"Today we have a beautiful new home on a two-acre lot and a 
year-round cabin a couple hundred miles north of here. There's 
no more worry about whether we can send the kids to a good 
college, and my wife no longer has to feel guilty every time she 
spends money for some new clothes. Next summer the whole 

--- Page 22 ---
16 BElIEVE YOU CArl SUCCEED AriD YOU WILL 
family is flying to Europe to spend a month's holiday. We're 
really living." 
"How did this all happen)" I asked. 
"It all happened,"- he continued, "when, to use the phrase 
you used tonight, 'I harnessed the power of belief: Five years ago 
I learned about a job with a tool·and·die company here in Detroit. 
We were living in Cleveland at the time. I decided to look into 
it, hoping I could make a Jittle more money. I got here early on 
Sunday evening, but the interview was not until Monday. 
'Mer dinner I sat down' in my hotel room, and for some 
reason, I got really disgusted with myself. 'Why,' I asked myself, 
'am Ijust a middle·class failure? Why am I trying to get ajob that 
represe.nts such a small step forward?' 
"I don't know to this day what prompted n:e to do it, but 
I took a sheet of hotel stationery and wrote down the names 
of five people I've known well for several years who had far 
surpassed me in earning power and job responsibility. Two were 
former neighbo'rs who had moved away to fme -subdivisions. 
Two others were fellows I had worked for, and the third was a 
brother·in·law. 
"Next-again I don't know what made me do this-I asked 
myself, what do my five friends have that I don't have, besides 
better jobs? I compared myself with them on inteiligence, but I 
honestly couldn't see that they excelled in the brains department. 
Nor could I truthfully say they had me beat on education, integ· 
rity, or personal habits. 
"Finally, I got down to another success quality one hears a 
lot about: initiative. Here I hated to admit it, but I had to. On this 
point my record showed I waS far below that of my successful 
friends. 

--- Page 23 ---
BELIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED AND YOU WILL 17 
"It was now about 3 A.M., but my mind was astonishingly 
clear. I was seeing my weak point for the first time. I discovered 
that I had held back. I had always carried a little stick. I dug into 
myself deeper and deeper and found the reason I lacked initiative 
was because I didn't believe inside that I was worth very much. 
"I sat there the rest of the night just reviewing how lack of 
faith in myself had dominated me ever since I could remember, 
how'! had used my mind to work against myself. I found I had 
been preaching to myself why I couldn't get ahead instead of 
why I could. I had been selling myself short. I found this streak 
of self-depreciation showed through in everything I did. Then it 
dawned on me that no one else was going to believe in me until 
I believed in myself. 
"Right then I decided, 'I'm through feeling second-class. 
From here on in I'm not going to sell myself short.' 
"Next morning I still had that confidence. During the job 
interview I gave my newfound confidence its fll'st test. Before 
coming for the interview I'd hoped I would have courage to ask 
for $750 or maybe even $1,000 more than my present job was 
paying. But now, after realizing I was a valuable man, I upped it 
to $3,500. And I got it. I sold myself because after that one long 
night of self-analysis I found things in myself that made me a lot 
more salable. 
"Within two years after I took that job I had established a 
reputation as the fellow who can get business. Then we went into 
a recession. This made me still more valuable because I was one 
of the best business-getters in the industry. The company was 
reorganized and I was given a substantial amount of stock plus 
a lot more pay." 
Believe in yourself, and good things do start happening. 

--- Page 24 ---
1B BELIEVE YOU CArl SUCCEED ArlO YOU Will 
* 
Your mind is a "thought factory." It's a busy fa.ctory, producing 
countless thoughts in one day. 
Production in your thought factory is under the charge of 
two foremen, one of whom we will call Mr. Triumph and the 
other Mr. Defeat. Mr. Triumph is in charge of manufacturing 
positive thoughts. He specializes in producing reasons why you 
can, why you're qualified, why you will. 
The other foreman, Mr. Defeat, produces negative, depre­
cating thoughts. He is your expert in developing reasons why you 
can't, why you're weak, why you're inadequate. His specialty is 
the "why-you-will-fail" chain of thoughts. 
Both Mr. Triumph and Mr. Defeat are intensely obedient. 
They snap to attention immediately. All you need do to signal 
either foreman is to give the slightest mental beck and call. If the 
signal is positive, Mr. Triumph will step forward and go to work. 
Likewise, a negative signal brings Mr. Defeat forward. 
To see how these two foremen work for you, try this exam­
ple. Tell yourself, "Today is a lousy day." This signals Mr. Defeat 
into action, and he manufactures some facts to prove you are 
right. He suggests to you that it's too hot or it's too cold, business 
will be bad today, sales will drop, other people will be on edge, 
you may get sick, your wife will be in a fussy mood. Mr. Defeat is 
tremendously efficient. In just a few moments he's got you sold. 
It is a bad day. Before you know it, it is a heck of a bad day. 
But tell yourself, "Today is a fme day," and Mr. Triumph is 
signaled forward to act. He tells you, "This is a wOl1deifill day. The 
weather is refieshing. It's good to be alive. Today you can catch 
up on some of your work." And then it is a good day. 
In llke fashion Mr. Defeat can show you why you can't sell 

--- Page 25 ---
BElIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED AND YOU WILL 19 
Mr. Smith; Mr. Triumph will show you that you can. Mr. Defeat 
will convince you that you will fail, while Mr. Triumph will dem­
onstrate why you will succeed. Mr. Defeat will prepare a brilliant 
case against Tom, while Mr. Triumph will show you more rea­
sons why you like Tom. 
Now; the more work you give either of these two foremen, 
the stronger he becomes. If Mr. Defeat is given more work to 
do, he adds personnel and takes up more space in your mind. 
Eventually, he will take over the entire thought-manufacturiug 
division, and virtually all thought will be of a negative nature. 
The only wise thing to do is fire Mr. Defeat. You don't 
need him. You don't want him around telling you that you can't, 
you're not up to it, you'll fail, and so on. Mr. Defeat won't help. 
you get where you want to go, so boot him out. 
Use Mr. Triumph 100 percent of the time. When any 
thought enters your mind, ask Mr. Triumph to go to work for 
you. He'll show you how you can succeed. 
Between now and tomorrow at this time another 11,500 
new consumers will have made their grand eptry into the U.S.A. 
Population is growing at a record rate. In the next ten years 
the increase is conservatively estimated at 35 million. That's 
equal to the present combined metropolitan population of our· 
five biggest cities: New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Detroit, and 
Philadelphia. Imagine! 
New industries, new scientific breakthroughs, expanding 
markets-all spell opportunity. This is good news. This is a most 
wonderful time to be alive! 
All signs point to a record demand for top-level people in 
every field-people who have superior ability to influence oth­
ers, to direct their work, to serve them in a leadership capacity. 

--- Page 26 ---
20 BELIEVE YOU GAil SUCCEED Aim YOU WILL 
And the people who will fill these leadership positions ar~ all 
adults or near adults right now. One of them is you. 
The guarantee of a boom is not, of course, a guarantee of 
personal success. Over the long pull, the United States has always 
been booming. But just a fast glance shows that millions and mil­
lions of people-in fact, a majority of them-struggle but don't 
really succeed. The majority of folks still plug along in medioc­
rity despite the record opportunity of the last two decades. And 
in the boom period ahead, most people will continue to worry, 
to be afraid, to crawl through life feeling unimportant, unap­
preciated, not able to do what they want to do. As a result, their 
performance will earn them petty rewards, petty happiness. 
Those who convert opportunity into reward (and let me 
say, I sincerely believe you are one of those, else you'd rely on 
luck and not bother with this book) will be those wise people 
who learn how to think themselves to success. 
Walkin. The door to success is open wider than ever before. 
Put yourself on record now that you are going to join that select 
group that is getting what it wants from life. 
Here is the first step toward success. It's a basic step. It 
can'tbe avoided. Step One: Believe in yourself, believe you can 
succeed. 
HOW TO DEVELOP THE POWER OF BELIEF 
Here are the three guides to acquiring and strengthening the 
power of belief: 
1. Think success, don't think failure. At work, in your home, 
substitute success thinking for failure thinking. When you 
face a difHcult situation, think, ''I'll win," not 'Til probably 

--- Page 27 ---
BEliEVEYOU CAN SUCCEED Arm YOU WILL 21 
lose." When you compete with someone else, think, "I'm 
equal to the best," not "I'm outclassed." When opportunity 
appears, think "1 can do it," never "1 can't." Let the master 
thought "1 will succeed" dominate your thinking process. 
Thinking success conditions your mind to create plans that 
produce success. Thinking failure does the e)Cact opposite. 
Failure thinking conditions the mind to think other thoughts 
that produce failure. 
2. Remind yourself regularly that you are better than you think 
you are. Successful people are not supermen. Success does 
not require a superintellect. Nor is there anything mystical 
about success. And success isn't based on luck. Successful 
people are just ordinary folks who have developed belief 
in themselves and what they do. Never-yes, never-sell 
yourself short. 
3. Believe Big. The size of your success is determined by the 
size of your belief. Thinklittfe goals and e)Cpect litde achieve­
ments. Think big goals and win big success. Remember 
this, too! Big ideas and big plans are often easiel~certainly 
no more difficult-than small ideas and small plans. 
Mr. Ralph J. Cordiner, chairman of the board of the 
General Electric Company, said this to a leadership conference: 
"We need from every man who aspires to leadership-for him­
self and his company-a determination to undertake a personal 
program of self-development. Nobody is going to order a man 
to develop .... Whether a man lags behind or moves ahead in 
his specialty is a matter of his own personal application. This is 

--- Page 28 ---
22 BELIEVE YOU CAli SUCCEEO ANO YOU WILL 
something which takes time, work, and sacrifice. Nobody can do 
it for you." 
Mr. COl'diner's advice is sound and practical. Live it. Persons 
who reach the top rungs in business management, selling, engi­
neering, religious work, writing, acting, and in every other pur­
suit get there by following conscientiously and continuously a 
plan for selfdevelopment and growth. 
Any training program-and that's exactly what this book 
, is-must do three things. It must provide content, the what-to­
do. Second, it must supply a method, the how-to-do-it. And third, 
it must meet the acid test; that is, get results. 
The what of your personal training program for success is 
built on the attitudes and techniques of successful people. How 
do they manage themselves? How d? they overcome obsta~les? 
How do they earn the respect of others? What sets them apart 
fi'om the ordinary? How do they think? 
The how. of your plan for development and growth is a 
series of concrete guides for action. These are found in each 
chapter. These guides work. Apply them and see for yourself. 
What about the most important part of training: results? 
Wrapped up briefly, conscientious application of the program 
presented here will bring you success and on a scale that may 
now look impossible. Broken down into its components, your 
personal training program for success will bring you a series 
of rewards: the reward of deeper respect from your family, 
the reward of admiration from your fi'iends and assoCiates, the 
reward of feeling useful, of being someone, of having status, the 
reward of increased income and a higher standard of living. 
Your training is self-administered. There will be no one 
standing over your shoulder telling you what to do and how to 

--- Page 29 ---
BElIEVE YOU CAN SUCCEED AtlDYOU Will 23 
do it. This book will be your guide, bur only you can understand 
yourself. Only you can command yourself to apply this training. 
Only you can evaluate your progress. Only you can bring about 
corrective action should you slip a little. In short, you are going 
to train yourself to achieve bigger and bigger success. 
You already have a fully equipped laboratory in which you 
can work and study. Your laboratory is' all around you. Your labo­
ratory consists of human beings. This laboratory supplies you 
with every possible example of human action. And there is no 
limit to what you can learn once you see yourself as a scientist 
in your own lab. What's more, there is nothing to buy. There is 
no rent to pay. There are no fees of any kind. You can use this 
laboratory as much as you like for free. 
As director of your own laboratory. you will want ro do 
what every scientist does: observe and experiment. 
Isn't it surprising to you that most people understand so 
little about why people act as they do even though they are sur­
rounded by people all their lives? Most peopfe are not trained 
observers. One important purpose of this book is to help you 
train yourself to observe, to develop deep insight into human 
action. You'll want to ask yourself questions like 'Why is John so 
successful and Tom just getting by?" "Why do some people have 
many friends and other people have only few friends?" "Why 
will people gladly accept what one person tells them but ignore 
another person who tells them the same thing?" 
Once trained, you will learn valuable lessons just through 
the very simple process of observing .. 
Here are two special suggestions to help you make yourself 
a trained observer. Select for special study the most successful 
and the most unsuccessful person you know; Then, as the book 

--- Page 30 ---
24 BELIEVE YOU CArl SUCCEED ArlO YOU WILL 
unfolds, observe how closely your successful friend adheres 
to the success principles. Notice also how studying the two 
extremes will help you see the unmistakable wisdom of follow­
ing the truths outlined in this book. 
Each contact you make with another person gives you 
a chance to see success development principles at work. Your 
objective is to make successful action habitUal. The more we 
practice, the. sooner it becomes second nature to act in the 
desired way. 
Most of us have fi:iends who grow things for a hobby. And 
we've all heard them say something like "It's exciting to watch 
those plants grow; Just look how they respond to plant food and 
water. See how much bigger they are today than they were last 
week." 
To be sure, it is thrilling to watch what can happen when 
men cooperate carefully with nature. But it is not one-tenth as 
fascinating as watching yourself respond to your own carefully 
administered thought management program. It's fun to feel 
yourself growing more confident, more effective, more success­
ful day by day, month by month. Nothing-absolutely noth­
ing-in this life gives you more satisfaction than kllowing you're 
on the road to success and achievement. And nothing stands as a 
bigger challenge than making the most of yourself, 

--- Page 31 ---
2 
GURE YOURSELF OF EXGUSITIS, 
THE FAILURE DISEASE 
PEOPLE--AS YOU THINK YOURSELF to success, that's what you 
will study, people. You will study people very caref?lly to dis­
covel; then apply, success-rewarding principles to your life. And 
you Want to begin right away. 
Go deep into your study of people, and you'll discover unsuc­
cessful people suffer a mind-deadening thought disease. We call 
this disease excusitis. Every failure has this disease in its advanced 
form. And most "average" persons have at least a mild case of it. 
You will discover that excusitis explains the difference 
between the person who is going places and the fellow who is 
barely holding his own. You will fuid that the more successful the 
individual, the less inclined he is to make excuses. 
But the fellow who has gone nowhere and has no plans for 
getting anywhere always has a bookful of reasons to explain why. 
Persons with mediocre accomplishments are qUick to explain why 
they haven't, why they don't, why they can't, and why they aren't. 
Study the lives of successful people and you'll discover this: 
all the excuses made by the mediocre fellow could be but aren't 
made by the successful person. 

--- Page 32 ---
26 CUREVOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
I have never met nor heard of a highly successful business 
executive, military officer, salesman, professional person, or leader 
in any field who could not have found one or more major excuses 
to hide behind. Roosevelt could have hidden behind his lifeless 
legs; Truman could have used "no college education"; Kennedy 
could have said, "I'm too young to be president"; Johnson and 
Eisenhower could have ducked behind heart attacks. 
Like any disease, excusitis gets worse if it isn't treated prop­
erly. A victim of this thought disease goes through this mental 
process: "I'm not doing as well as I should. What can I use as an 
alibi that will help me save face? Let's see: poor health? lack of 
education? too old) too young? bad luck) personal misfortune? 
wife? the way my family brought me up)" 
Once the victim of this failure disease has' selected a "good" 
excuse, he sticks with it. Then he relies on the excuse to explain 
to himself and others why he is not going forward. 
And each time the victim makes the excuse, the excuse 
becomes imbedded deeper within his subconsciousness. Thoughts, 
positive or negative, grow stronger when fertilized with constant 
repetition. At first the victim of excusitis knows his alibi is more 
or less a lie. But the more frequently he repeats it, the more con­
vinced he becomes that it is completely true, that the alibi is the 
real reason for his not being the success he should be. 
Procedure One, then, in your individual program of think­
ing yourself to success, must be to vaccinate yourself against 
eXCJlsitis, the disease of the failures. 
THE FOUR MOST COMMON FORMS OF EXCUSITIS 
Excusitis appears in a wide variery of forms, but the worst types 
of this disease are health excusitis, intelligence excusitis, age 

--- Page 33 ---
CUREYOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 27 
excusitis, and luck excusitis. Now let's see just how we can pro­
tect ourselves from these four common ailments. 
1. "But My Health Isn't Good." 
Health excusitis ranges all the way from the chronic "1 don't feel 
good" to the more specific "I've got such-and-such wrong with 
me." 
"Bad" health, in a thousand different forms, is used as an 
excuse for failing to do what a person wants to do, failing to 
accept greater responsibilities, failing to make more money, fail­
ing to achieve success. 
Millions and millions of people suffer from health excusitis. 
But is it, in most cases, a legitimate excuse? Think for a moment 
of all the highiy successful people you know who could-but 
who don't-use health as an excuse. 
My physician and sutgeon friends tell me the perfect speci­
men of adult life is nonexistent. There is something physically 
wrong with everybody. Many surrender in whole or in .part to 
health excusitis, but success-thinking people do not . 
. 1\vo experiences happened to me in one afternoon that 
illustrate the correct and incorrect attitudes toward health. 1 had 
just finished a talk in Cleveland. Afterwards, ohe fellow; about 
thirty, asked to speak to me privately for a few minutes. He com­
plimented me on the meeting but then said, 'T m afraid your 
ideas can't do me much good." 
"You see,'· he continued, "I've got a bad heart, and I've got 
to hold myself in check." He went on to explain that he'd seen 
four doctors but they couldn't fmd his trouble. He asked me 
what 1 would suggest he do. 
"Well,'· 1 said, "1 know nothing about the heart, but as one 

--- Page 34 ---
28 GUREVOURSELF OF EXGUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE. 
layman to another, here are three things I'd do. First, I'd visit the 
finest heart specialist I could find and accept his diagnosis as final. 
You've already checked with four doctors, and none of them has 
found anything peculiar with your heart. Let the fifth doctor be 
your final check. It may very well be you've got a perfectly sound 
heart. But if you keep on worrying about it, eventually you may 
have a very serious heart ailment. Looking and looking and look­
ing for an illness often actually produces illness. 
"The second thing I'd recommend is that you read Dr. 
Schindler's great book, How to Live 365 Days a Year. Dr. Schindler 
shows in this book that three out of every four hospital beds are 
occupied by people who-have Ell-Emotionally Induced Illness. 
Imagine, three out of four people who are sick right now would 
be well if they had learned how to handle their emotions. Read 
Dr. Schindler's book and develop your program for 'emotions 
management: 
"Third, I'd resolve to live until I die." I went on to explain to 
this troubled fellow some sound advice I received many years ago 
from a lawyer friend who had an arrested case of tuberculosis. 
This friend knewhe would have to live a regulated life but this 
hasn't stopped him from practicing la\'I, rearing a fme family, and 
really enjoying life. My friend, who now is seventy-eight years 
old, expresses his philosophy in these words: ''j'm going to live 
until I die and I'm not going to get life and death confused. While 
I'm on this earth I'm going to live. Why be only half alive? Every 
minute a person spends worrying about dying is just one minute 
that fellow might as well have been dead." 
I had to leave at that point, because I had to be on a certain 
plane for Detroit. On the plane the ~econd but much more pleas-

--- Page 35 ---
GUREYOURSELF OF EXGUSITlS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 29 
ant experience occurred. After the noise of the takeoff, I heard 
a ticking sound. Rather startled, I glanced at the fellow sitting 
beside me, for the sound seemed to be coming fi'om him. 
He smiled a big smile and said, "Oh, it's not a bomb. It's 
just my heart." 
I was obviously surprised, so he proceeded to tell me what 
had happened. 
Just twenty-one days before, he had undergone an opera­
tion tllat involved putting a plastic valve into his heart. The 
ticking sound, he explained, would continue for several months, 
until new tissue had grown over the artificial valve. I asked him 
what he was going to do. 
"Oh," he said, ''I've got big plans. I'm going to study law 
when I get back to Minnesota. Someday I hope to be in govern­
ment work. The doctors tell me I must. take it easy for a few 
months, but after that I'll be like new." 
There you have two ways of meeting health problems. The 
first fellow, not even sure he had anything organically wrong 
with him, was worried, depressed, on the road to defeat, want­
ing somebody to second his motion that he couldn't go forward. 
The second individual, after undergoing one of the most difficult 
of operations, was optimistic, eager to do something. The differ­
ence lay in how they thought toward health! 
I've had some very direct experience with health excusitis. 
I'm a diabetic. Right after I discovered I had this ailment (about 
5,000 hypodermics ago), I was warned, "Diabetes is a physical 
condition; but the biggest damage results from having a nega­
tive attitude toward it. Worry about it, and you may have real 
trouble." 

--- Page 36 ---
30 CURE YOURSELf Of EXcUSITIS,THE fAILURE DISEASE 
Naturally, since the discovery of my own diabetes, I've got­
ten to know a great many other diabetics. Let me tell you about 
two extremes. One fellow who has a very mild case belongs to 
that fraternity of the living dead. Obsessed with a fear of the 
weather, he is usually ridiculously bundled up. He's afi'aid of 
infection, so he shuns anybody who has the slightest sniffle. He's 
afraid of overexertion, so he does almost nothing. He spends 
most of his mental energy worrying about what might happen. 
He bores other people telling them "how awful" his problem 
really is. His real ailment is not diabetes. Rather, he's a victim of 
health excusitis. He has pitied himself into being an invalid. 
The other extreme is a division manager for a large publish­
ing company. He has a severe case; he takes about thirty times as 
much insulin as the fellow mentioned above. But he is not living 
to be sick. He is living to enjoy his work and have fun. One day 
he said to me, "Sure it is an inconvenience, but so is shaving. But 
I'm Hot going to think myself to bed. When I take those shots, I 
just praise the guys who discovered insulin." 
A good fi'iend of mine, a widely known college educator, 
came home fi'om Europe in 1945 minus one arm. Despite his 
handicap, John is always smiling, always helping others. He's 
about as optimistic as anyone I know. One day he and I had a long 
talk about his handicap. 
"It's just an arm," he said, "Sure, two are better than one. 
But they just cut off my arm. My spirit is one hundred percent 
intact. I'm really grateful for that." 
Another amputee friend is an excellent golfer. One day I 
asked him how he had been able to develop such a near-perfect 
style with just one arm. I mentioned that most golfers with two 
anns can't do nearly as well. His reply says a lot. "Well, it's my 

--- Page 37 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXcUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 31 
experience," he said, "that the right attitude and one arm will 
beat the wrong attitude and two arms every time." The right 
attitude and one arm will beat the wrong attitllde and two arms every 
time. Think about that for a while. It holds true not only on the 
golf course but in every facet of life. 
Four Things You Can Do to Licl( Health Excusitis 
The best vaccine against health excusitis consists of these four 
doses: 
1. Refuse to talk about your health. The more you talk about 
an ailment, even the common cold, the worse it seems to 
get. Talking about bad health is like putting fertilizer on 
weeds. Besides, talking about your health is a bad habit. 
It bores people. It makes one appear self-centered and 
old-maidish. Success-minded people defeat the natural 
tendency to talk about their "bad" health. One may (and , 
let me emphasize the word may) get a little sympathy, but 
one doesn't get respect and loyalty by being a chronic 
complainer. 
·2. Refuse to worry about your health. Dr. Walter Alvarez, 
emeritus consultant to the world-famous Mayo Clinic, 
wrote recehtly, "I always beg worriers to exercise some self­
control. For instance, when I saw this man (a fellow who 
was convinced he had a diseased gallbladder although eight 
separate X-ray examinations showed that the organ was 
perfectly normal), I begged him to quit getting his gallblad­
der X-rayed. I have begged hundreds of heart-conscious 
men to quit getting electrocardiogra,ms made." 

--- Page 38 ---
32 CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITlS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 
3. Be genuinely grateful that your health is as good as it is. 
There's an old saying worth repeating often: "1 felt sorry for 
myself because 1 had ragged shoes until 1 met a man who had 
no feet." Instead of complaining about "not feeling good," 
it's far better to be glad you are as healthy as you are. Just 
being grateful for the health you have is powerful vaccination 
against developing new aches and pains and real illness. 
4. Remind yourself often, "It's better to wear out than rust 
out." Life is yours to enjoy. Don't waste it. Don't pass up 
living by thinking yourself into a hospital bed. 
2. "But You've Got to Have Brains to Succeed." 
Intelligence excusitis, or "1 lack brains," is common. In fact, it's 
so common that perhaps as many as 95 percent of the people 
around us have it in varying degrees. Unlike most other types of 
excusitis, people suffering from this particular type of the malady 
suffer in silence. Not many people will admit openly that they 
think they lack adequate intelligence. Rather, they feel it deep 
down inside. 
Most of us make two basic errors with respect to intelligence: 
1. We underestimate our own brainpower. 
2. We overestimate the othei' fellow's brainpower, 
Because of these errors many people sell themselves short. 
They fail to tackle challenging situations because it "takes a brain." 
But along comes the fellow who isn't concerned about intelli­
gence, and he gets the job. 

--- Page 39 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXcUSITlS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 33 
What really matters is not how much intelligence you have 
but how you use what you do have. The thinking that guides 
your intelligence is much more important than the quantity of 
your brainpower. Let me repeat, for this is vitally important: the 
thinking that guides your intelligence is much more important than 
how much intellige11ce you may have. 
In answering the question, "Should your child be a sci­
entist?" Dr. Edward Teller, one of the nation's foremost physi­
cists, said, ''A child does not need·a lightning-fast mind to be 
a ·scientist, nor does he need a miraculous memory, nor is it 
necessary that he get very high grades in school. The only point 
that counts is that the child have a high degree of interest in 
science." 
Interest, enthusiasm, is the critical factor even in science! 
With a positive, optimistic, and cooperative attitude a per­
son with an IQ of 100 will earn more money, win more respect, 
and achieve more success than a negative, pessimistic, uncoop­
erative individual with an IQ of 120. 
Just enough sense to stick with something-a chore, task, 
project-until it's completed pays off m,!ch better than idle intel­
ligence, even if idle intelligence be of genius caliber. 
For stickability is 95 percent of ability. 
At a homecoming celebration last year I met a college 
friend whom I had not seen for ten years. Chuck was a very 
bright student and was graduated with honors. His goal when I 
last saw him was to own his own business in western Nebraska. 
I asked Chuck what kind of business he fmally established. 
'Well," he confessed, "I didn't go into business for myself. I 
wouldn't have said this to anyone five years ago or even one year 
ago, but now I'm ready to talk about it. 
I 

--- Page 40 ---
34 GUREYOURSELF OF EXGUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
"As I look back at my college education now, I see that 
I became an expert in why a business idea won't work out. I 
learned every conceivable pitfall, every reason why a small busi­
ness will fail: 'You've got to have ample capital;' 'Be sure the 
business cycle is right;' 'Is there a big demand for what you will 
offer?' 'Is local industry stabillzed?'-a thousand and one things 
to check out. 
"The thing that hurts most is that several of myoId high 
school friends who never seemed to have much on the ball and 
didn't even go to college now are very well established in their 
own businesses. But me, I'm just plodding along, auditing freight 
shipments. Had I been drilled a little more in why a small busi­
ness can succeed, I'd be better off in every way today." 
The thinking that guided Chuck's intelligence was a lot 
more important than the amount of Chuck's intelligence. 
Why som~ brilliant people are failures. I've been close for many 
years to a person who qualifies as a genius, has high abstract 
intelligence, and is Phi Beta Kappa. Despite this very high native 
intelligence, he is one of the most unsuccessful people I know. 
'He has a very mediocre job (he's ali'aid of responsibility). He 
has never married (lots of marriages end in divorce). He has few 
friends (people bore him). He's never invested in property of any 
kind (he might lose his money). This man uses his great brain­
power to prove why things won't work rather than directing his 
mental power to searching for ways to succeed. 
Because of the negative thinking that guides his great res­
ervoir of brains, this fellow contributes little and creates nothing. 
With a changed attitude, he could do great things indeed. He 
has the brains to be a tremendous success, but not the thought 
power. 

--- Page 41 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 35 
Another person I know well was inducted into' the Army 
shortly after earning the ph.D. degree from a leading New York 
university. How did he spend his three years in the Army? Not 
as an officer. Not as a staff specialist. Instead, for three years he 
drove a truck. Why? Because he was fIlled with negative attitudes 
toward fellow soldiers ("I'm superior to them"), toward army 
methods and procedures ("They are stupid"), toward discipline 
("It's for others, not me"), toward everything, including himself 
("I'm a fool for not figuring out a way to escape this rap"). 
This fellow earned no respect fi'om anyone. All his vast store 
of knowledge lay buried. His negative attitudes turned him into a 
flunky. 
Remember, the thinking that guides your intelligence is 
much more important than how much intelligence you have. Not 
even a Ph.D. degree can override this basic success principle! 
Several years ago I became a close friend of Phil E, one of 
the senior officers of a major advertising agency. Phil was direc­
tor of marketing research for the agency, and he was doing a 
bang-up job. 
Was Phil a 'brain"? Far from it. phil knew next to nothing 
about research technique. He knew next to nothing about statis­
tics. He was not a college graduate (though all the people work­
ing for him were). And Phil did not pretmd to know the technical 
side of research. What, then, enabled Phil to command $30,000 a 
year while not one of his subordinates earned $10,000? 
This: phil was a "human" engineer. Phil was 100 percent 
positive. Phil could inspire others when they felt low; phil was 
enthusiastie. He generated enthusiasm; phil understood people, 
and, because he could really see what made them tick, he liked 
them. 

--- Page 42 ---
36 GUREYOURSELF OF EXGUSITlS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
Not Phil's brains, but how he managed those brains, made 
him three times more valuable to his company than men who 
rated higher on the IQ scale. 
Out of every 100 persons who enroll in college, fewer than 
50 will graduate. I was curious about this so I asked a director of 
admissions at a large university for his explanation. 
"It's not insufficient intelligence," he said. "We don't admit 
them if they don't have sufficient ability. And it's not money. 
Anyone who wants to support himself in college today can do 
so. The real reason is attitudes. You would be surprised," he said, 
"how many young people leave because they don't like their pro­
fessors, the subjects they must take, and their fellow students." 
The same reason, negative thinking, explains why the 
door to top-flight executive positions is closed to many young 
junior executives. Sour, negative, pessimistic, depreciating atti­
tudes rather than insufficient intelligence hold back thousands 
of young executives. As one executive told me, "It's a rare case 
when we pass up a young fellow because he lacks brains. Nearly 
always it's attitude." 
. Once I was retained by an insurance company to learn why 
the top 25 percent of the agents were selling over 75 percent of 
the insurance while the bottom 25 percent of the agents sold 
only 5 percent of total volume. 
Thousands of personnel files were carefully checked. The 
search proved beyond any question that no significant differ­
ence existed in native intelligence. What's more, differences in 
education did ·not explain the difference in selling success. The 
difference in the very successful and the very unsuccessful fmally 
reduced to differences in attitudes, or difference in thought man-

--- Page 43 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXcUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 37 
agement. The top group worried less, was more enthusiastic, 
had a sincere liking for people. 
We can't do much to change the amount of native ability, 
but we can certainly change the way we use what we have. 
Knowledge is power-when you use it constructively. Closely allled 
to intelligence excusi~is is some incorrect thinking about knowl­
edge. We often hear that knowledge is power. But this statement is 
only a half-truth. Knowledge is only potential power. Knowledge 
is power only when put to use-and then only when the use made 
of it is constructive. 
The story is told that the great scientist Einstein was once 
asked how many feet are in a mile. Einstein's reply was "I don't 
know; Why should I fill my brain with facts I can fmd in two 
minutes in any standard reference book?" 
Einstein taught us a big lesson. He felt it was more important 
to use your mind to think than to use it as a warehouse for facts. 
One time Henry Ford was involved in a libel suit with the 
Chicago Tribune. The Tribune had called Ford an ignoramus, and 
Ford said, in effect, "Prove it." 
The Tribune asked him scores of simple questions such as 
"Who was Benedict Arnold?" "When was the Revolutionary War 
fought?" and others, most of which Ford, who had little formal 
education, could not answer. 
Finally he became quite exasperated and said, "I don't know 
. the answers to those questions, but I could find a man in five 
minutes who does." 
Henry Ford w~s never interested in miscellaneous informa­
tion. He knew what every major executive knows: that the ability 

--- Page 44 ---
38 CUREYOURSELF OF EXCUSITlS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
to know how to get information is more important than using 
the mind as a garage for facts. 
How much is a fact man worth? I spent a very interesting evening 
recently with a friend who is the president of a young but rapidly 
growing manufacturing concern. The TV set happened to be 
turned to one of the most popular quiz programs. The fellow 
being quizzed had been on the show for several weeks. He could 
answer questions on all sorts of subjects, many of which seemed 
nonsensical. 
After the fellow answered a particularly odd question, some-. 
thing about a mountain in Argentina, my host looked at me and 
said, "How much do you think I'd pay that guy to work for me?" 
"How much?" I asked. 
"Not a cent over $300-not per week, not per month, but 
for life. I've sized him up. That' expert' can't think. He can only 
memorize. He's just a human encyclopedia, and I figure for $300 
I can buy il pretty good set of encyclopedias. In fact, maybe that's 
too much. Ninety percent of what that guy knows I can find in 
a $2 almanac. 
"What I want around me," he continued, "are people who 
can solve problems, who can think up ideas.' People who can 
dream and then develop the dream into a practical application; 
an idea man can make money with me; a fact man can't." 
Three Ways to Cure Intelligence Excusitis 
Three easy ways to cure intelligence excusitis are: 
1. Never underestimate your own intelligence, and never 
overestimate the intelligence of others. Don't sell yourself 

--- Page 45 ---
CURE YOURSELf Of EXCUSITIS, THE fAILURE DISEASE 39 
short. Concentrate on your assets. Discover your superior 
talents. Remember, it's not how many brains you've got 
that matters. Rather, it's how you use your brains that 
counts. Manage your brains instead of worrying about how 
much IQ you've got. 
2. Remind yourself several times daily, "My attitudes are more 
important than my intelligence." At work and at home 
practice positive attitudes. See the reasons why you can do 
it, not the reasons why you can't. Develop an "I'm winning" 
attitude. Put your intelligence to creative positive use. Use it 
to fmd ways to win, not to prove you will lose. 
3. Remember that the ability to think is of much greater 
value than the ability to memorize facts. Use your mind 
to create and develop ideas, to find new and better ways, 
to do things. Ask yourself, '11m I using my mental ability 
to make history, or am I using it merely to record history 
made by others?" 
3. "It's No Use. I'm Too Old (or Too Young)." 
Age excusitis, the failure disease of never being the right age, 
comes in two easily identifiable forms: the "I'm too old" variety 
and the "I'm too young" brand. 
You've heard hundreds of people of all ages explain their 
mediocre performance in life something like this: 'Tm too old 
(or too young) to break in now. I can't do what I want to do or 
am capable of doing because of my age handicap." 
Really, it's surprising how few people feel they are "just 
right" age-wise. And it's unfortunate. This excuse has closed the 

--- Page 46 ---
40 CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 
door of real opportunity to thousands of individuals. They think 
their age is wrong, so they don't even bother to try. 
The 'Tm too old" variety is the most common form of 
age excusitis. This disease is spread in subtle ways. TV fiction 
is produced about the big executive who lost his job because 
of a merger and can't find another because he's too old. Mr. 
Executive looks for months to find another job, but he can't, and 
in the end, after contemplating suicide for a while, he decides to 
rationalize that it's nice to be on the shelf. 
Plays and magazine articles on the topic 'Why You Are 
Washed Up at 40" are popular, not because they represent true 
facts, but because they appeal to many worried minds looking 
for an excuse. 
How to Handle Age Excusitis 
Age excusitis can be cured. A few years ago, while I was conduct­
ing a sales training program, I discovered a good serum that both 
cures this disease and vaccinates you so you won't get it in the 
first place. 
In that training program there was a trainee named Cecil. 
<::ecil, who was forty; wanted to shift over to set himself up as a 
manufacturer's representative, but he thought he was too old. 
'l\frer all," he explained, "j'd have to start from scratch. And I'm 
too old for that now. I'm forty." 
I talked with Cecil several times about his "old age" prob­
lem. I used the old medicine, "You're oniy as old as you feel," 
but I found I was getting nowhere. (Too often people retort with 
"But I do feel old!") 
Finally, I discovered a method that worked. One day after 

--- Page 47 ---
CUR~ YOURSELF OF EXCUSlTIS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 41 
a training session, I tried it on Cecil. I said, "Cecil, when does a 
man's productive life begin?" 
He thought a couple of seconds and, answered, "Oh, when 
he's about twenty, I guess." 
"Okay," I said, "now, when does a man's productive life end?" 
Cecil answered, "Well, if he stays in good shape and likes 
his work, I guess a man is still pretty useful when he's seventy 
or SO," 
'1\.11 right," I said, "a lot of folks are highiy productive after 
they reach seventy, but let's agree with what you've just said, a 
man's productive years stretch from twenty to seventy, That's 
fifty years in between, or half a century. Cecil," I saicj, "you're 
forty, How many years of productive life have you spent?" 
"Twenty," he answered. 
"And how many have you left?" 
"Thirty," he replied. 
"In other words, Cecil, you haven't even reached the half­
way point; you've used up only forty percent of your productive 
years." 
I looked at Cecil and realized he'd gotten the point. 'He was 
cured of age excusitis. Cecil saw he still had many opportunity­
filled years left. He switched from thinking ''I'm already old" to 
'Tm still young." Cecil now realized that how old we are is not 
important. It's one's attitude toward age that makes it a blessing 
or a barricade. 
Curing yourself of age excusitis often opens doors to 
opportunities that you thought were locked tight. A relative of 
mine spent years doing many different things-selling, operating 
his own business, working in a bank-but he never quite found 

--- Page 48 ---
42 GUREYOURSELF OF EXGUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
what he really wanted to do most. Finally, he concluded that the 
one thing he wanted more than anything else was to be a minis­
ter. But when he thought about it, he found he was too old. After 
all, he was forty-five, had three young children and little money. 
But fortunately he mustered all of his strength and told 
himself, "Forty-five or not, I'm going to be a minister." 
With tons of faith but little else, he enrolled in a five-year 
ministerial training program in Wisconsin. Five years later he 
was ordained as a minister and settled down with a fine congre­
gation in Illinois. 
Old? Of course not. He still has twenty years of productive 
life ahead of him. I talked with this man not long ago, and he said 
to me, ''You know; if I had not made that great decision when I 
was forty-five, I would have spent the rest of my life growing 
old and bitter. Now I feel every bit as young as I did twenty-five 
years ago." 
And he almost looked it, too. When you lick age excusitis, 
the natural result is to gain the optimism of youth and feel of 
youth. When you beat down your fears of age limitations, you 
add years to your life as well as success. 
A former university colleague of mine provides an inter­
esting angle on how age excusitis was defeated. Bill' was gradu­
ated from Harvard in the 1920s. After twenty-four years in the 
stockbrokerage business, during which time he made a modest 
fortune, Bill decided he wanted to become a college professor. 
Bill's friends warned him that he would overtax himself in the 
rugged learning program ahead. But Bill was determined to 
reach his goal and enrolled in the University of Illinois-at the 
age of fifty-one. At fifty-five he had earned his degree. Today Bill 

--- Page 49 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXcUSITIS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 43 
is chairman of the Department of Economics at a fine liberal arts 
college. He's happy, too. He smiles when he says, 'Tve got almost 
a third of my good years left." 
Old age is a failure disease. Defeat it by refusing to let it 
hold you back. 
When is a person 100 young? The 'Tm too young" variety of age 
excusitis does much damage, too. About a year ago, a twenty­
three-year-old fellow named Jerry came to me with a problem. 
Jerry was a fine young man. He had been a paratrooper in the 
service and then had gone to college. While going to college, 
Jerry supported his wife and son by selling for a large transfer­
and-storage company. He had done a terrific job, both in college 
and for his company. 
But today Jerry was worried. "Dr. Schwartz," he said, 'Tve 
got a problem. My company has offered me the job of sales man­
ager. This would make me supervisor over eight salesmen." 
"Congratulations, that's wonderful news!" I said. "But you 
seem worried. H 
"Well," he continued, "all eight men I'm to supervise are 
from seven to twenty-one years older than I. What do you think 
I should do? Can I handle it?" 
'Jerry," I said, "the general manager of your company 
obviously thinks you're old enough or he wouldn't have offered 
you this job. Just remember these three points and everything 
will work out just fine: first, don't be age conscious. Back on 
the farm a boy became a man when he proved he could do the 
work of a man. His number of birthdays had nothing to do 
with it. And this applies to you. When you prove you are able 

--- Page 50 ---
44 CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITlS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 
to handle the job of sales manager, you're automatically old 
enough. 
"Second, don't take advantage of your new 'gold bars.' 
Show respect for the salesmen. Ask them for their suggestions. 
Make them feel they are working for a team captain, not a dicta­
tor. Do this and the men will work with you, not against you. 
"Third, get used to having older persons working for you. 
Leaders in all fields soon fmd they are younger than many of the 
people they supervise. So get used to having older men work for 
you. It will help you a lot in the coming years, when even bigger 
opportunities develop. 
'lind remember, Jerry, your age won't be a handicap unless 
you make it one." 
Today Jerry's doing fine. He loves the transportation busi­
ness, and now he's planning to organize his own company in a 
few years. 
Youth is a liability only when the youth thinks it is. You 
often hear. that certain jobs require "considerable" physical 
maturity, jobs like selling securities and insurance. That you've 
got to have either gray hair or no hair at all in order to gain an 
investor's confidence is plain nonsense:'What really matters is 
how well you know your job. If you know your job and under­
stand people, you're sufficiently mature to handle it. Age ha~ no 
real relation to ability, unless you convince yourself that years 
alone will give you the stuff you need to make your mark. 
Many young people feel that they are being held back 
because of their youth. Now, it is true· that another person in 
an organization who is insecure and job-scared may try to block. 
your way forward, using age 01' some other reason. 
But the people who really count in the company will not. 

--- Page 51 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 45 
They will give you as much responsibility as they feel you can 
handle well. Demonstrate that you have ability and positive atti­
tudes and your youthfulness will be considered an advantage. 
In quick recap, the cure for age excusitis is: 
1. Look at your present age positively. Think, 'Tm still 
young," not 'Tm already old." Practice looking forward· to new 
horizons and gain the enthusiasm and the fee! of youth. 
2. Compute how much productive time you have left. 
Remember, a person age thirty still has 80 percent of his pro­
ductive life ahead of him. And the fifty-year-old still has a big 40 
percent-the best 40 percent----{)f his opportunity years left. Life 
is actually longer than most people think! 
3. Invest future time in doing what you really want to do. 
It's too late only when you let your mind go negative and think 
it's too late. Stop thinking "I should have started years ago." 
That's failure thinking. Instead think, 'Tm going to start no\v, 
my best years are ahead of me." That's the way successful people 
think. 
4. "But My Case Is Different; I Attract Bad Lucie." 
Recently, I heard a traffic engineer discuss highway safety. He 
pointed out that upward of 40,000 persons are killed each year 
in so-called traffic accidents. The main point of his talk was that 
therds no such thing as a true accident. What we call an accident 
is the result of human or mechanical failure, or a combination 
of both .. 
. What this traffic expert was saying substantiates what wise 
men throughout the ages have said: there is a cause for everything. 
Nothing happens without a cause. There is nothing accidental 
about the weather outside today. It is the result of specific causes. 

--- Page 52 ---
46 C~REYOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS,THE FAILURE OISEASE 
And there is no reason to believe that human affairs are an excep­
tion. 
Yet hardly a day passes that you do not hear someone blame 
his problems on 'bad" luck. And it's a rare day that you do not 
hear someone attribute another person's success to "good" luck. 
Let me illustrate how people succumb to luck excusitis. I 
lunched recendy with three young junior executives. The topic 
of conversation that day was George C., who just yesterday had 
been picked fi'om among their group for a major promotion. 
Why did George get the position? These three fellows dug up 
all sorts of reasons: luck, pull, bootlicking, George's wife and how 
she flattered the boss, everything but the truth. The facts were that 
George was simply better qualified. He had been doing a better 
job. He was working harder. He had a more effective personality. 
I also knew that the senior officers in the company had 
spent much. time considering which one of the four would be 
promoted. My three disillusioned friends should have realized 
that top executives don't select major executives by drawing 
names from a hat. 
I was talking about the seriousness of luck excusitis not 
long ago with a sales executive of a machine tool-manufacturing 
company. He became excited about the problem and began to 
talk about his own experience with it. 
'Tve never heard it called that before," he said, "but it is 
one of the most difficult problems every sales executive has to 
wresdewith. Just yesterday a perfect example of what you~re 
talking about happened in my company. 
"One of the salesmen walked in about four 0' clock with 
a $112,000 order for machine tools. Another. salesman, whose 

--- Page 53 ---
CURE YOURSELF OF EXCUSITIS, THE FAILURE DISEASE 47 
volume is so low he's a problem, was in the office at the time. 
Hearing John tell the good news, he rather enviously congratu­
lated him and then said, 'Well, John, you're lucky again!' 
"Nmv, what the weak salesman won't accept is that luck 
had nothing to do with John's big order. John had been working 
on that customer for months. He had talked repeatedly to a half­
dozen people out there. John had stayed up nights figuring out 
exactly what was best for them. Then he got our engineers to 
make preliminary designs of the equipment. John wasn't lucky, 
unless you can call carefully planned work and patiently executed 
plans luck." 
Suppose luck were used to reorganize General Motors. Ifluck deter· 
mined who does what and who goes where, every busines.s in 
the nation would fall apart. Assume for a moment that General 
Motors were to be completely reorganized on the basis ofluck. 
To carry out the reorganization, the names of all employees 
would be placed in a barrel. The first name drawn would be 
president; the second name, the executive vice president, and so 
on down the line. 
Sounds stupid, doesn't it? Well, that's how luck would work. 
People who rise to the top in any occupation-business 
management, selling, law, engineering, acting, or what have 
you~get there because they have superior attitudes and use their 
good sense in applied hard work. 
Conquer Lucl< Excusitis in Two Ways 
1. Accept the law of canse and effect. Take a second look at 
what appears to be someone's "good luck." You'll fmd that 

--- Page 54 ---
48 CURE YOURSELF OF EXcUSITlS,THE FAILURE DISEASE 
not luck but preparation, planning, and success-producing 
thinking preceded his good fortune. Take a second look at 
what appears to be someone's 'bad luck." Look, and you'll 
discover certain specific reasons. Mr. Success receives a set­
back; he learns and profits, But when Mr. Mediocre loses, 
he fails to learn. 
2. Don't be a wishful thinker. Don't waste your mental mus­
cles dreaming of an effortless way to win success. We don't 
become successful simply through luck. Success comes 
from doing those thiflgs and mastering those principles 
that produce success. Don't count on luck for promotions, 
victories, the good things in life. Luck simply isn't designed 
to deliver these good things. Instead, just concentrate on 
developing those qualities in yourself that will make you a 
winner. 

--- Page 55 ---
3 
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
FRIENDS MEAN WELL WHEN they say, "It's only your imagina­
tion. Don't worry. There's nothing to be afraid of." 
But you and I know this kind of fear medicine never really 
works. Such soothing remarks may give us fear relief for a few 
minutes or maybe even a few hours. But the "it's-only-in-your­
imagination" treatment doesn't really build confidence and cure 
fear. 
Yes, fear is real. And we must recognize it exists before we 
can conquer it. 
Most fear today is psychological. Worry, tension, embar­
rassment, panic all stem from mismanaged, negative imagina­
tion. But simply knowing the breeding ground of fear doesn't 
cure fear. If a physician discovers you have an infection in some 
part of your body, he doesn't stop there. He proceeds with treat­
ment to cure the infection. 
The old "it's-only-in-your-mind" treatment presumes fear 
doesn't really exist. But it does. Fear is real. Fear is success enemy 
number one. Fear stops people from capitalizing on opportunity; 
fear wears down physical vitality; fear actually makes people sick, 

--- Page 56 ---
50 BUiLO CONFIDENCE ANO OESTROY FEAR 
causes organic difficulties, shortens life; fear closes your mouth 
when you want to speak. 
Fear-uncertainty, lack of confidence--explains why we 
still have economic recessions. Fear explains why millions of 
people accomplish little and enjoy little. 
Truly, fear is a powerful force. In one way or another fear 
prevents people from getting what they want from life. 
Fear of all kinds and sizes is a form of psychological infec­
tion. We can cure a mental infection the same way we cure a 
body infection-with specific, proved treatments. 
First, though, as part of your pretreatment preparation, 
condition yourself with this' fact: all confidence is acquired, 
developed. No one is born with confidence. Those people you 
know who radiate confidence, who have conquered worry, who 
are at ease everywhere and all the time, acquired their confi­
dence, every bit of it. 
You can, too. This chapter shows how. 
During World War II the Navy made sure that all of its new 
recruits either knew how to swim or learned how-the idea 
being, of course, that the ability to swim might someday save 
the sailor's life at sea. 
Nonswimming recruits were put into swimming classes. I 
watched a number of these training experiences. In a superficial 
sort of way, it was amusing to see young, healthy, men terrified 
by a few feet of water. One of the exercises I recall required the 
new sailor to jump---not dive-from a board six feet in the air 
into eight or more feet of water while a half-dozen expert s\~im­
mel'S stood by. 
In a deeper sense, it was a sad sight. The fear those young 

--- Page 57 ---
BUilD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 51 
men displayed was real. Yet all that stood between them and the 
defeat of that fear was one drop into the water below. On more 
than one occasion I saw young men "accidentally" pushed off the 
board. The result: fear defeated. 
This incident, familiar to thousands of former Navy men, 
illustrates just one point: action cures fear. Indecision, postpone­
ment, on the other hand, fertilize fear. 
Jot that down in your success rule book right now. Action 
cures ]far. 
Action does cure fear. Several months ago a very troubled 
executive in his early forties came to see me. He had a respon· 
sible job as a buyer for a large retailing organization. 
Worriedly, he explained, ''I'm afraid of losing my job. I've 
got that feeling that my days are numbered." 
"Why?" I asked. 
"Well, the pattern is against me. Sales fignres in my depart­
ment are off seven percent frolll a year ago. This is pretty bad, 
especially since the store's total sales are up six percent. I've made 
a couple of unwise decisions recently, and I've been singled out 
several times by the merchandise manager for not keeping pace 
with the company's progress. 
'Tve never felt quite like this before," he continued. 'Tve 
lost my grip, and it shows. My assistant buyer senses it. The sales­
people see it, too. Other executives, of course, are aware that 
I'm slipping. One buyer even suggested at a meeting of all head 
buyers the other day that part of my line should be put in his 
department, where, he said, 'It could make money for the store.' 
It's like drowning and having a crowd of spectators just standing 
there waiting for me to sink away." 
The executive talked on, elaborating further on his predica-

--- Page 58 ---
52 BUILD CONFIDENCE Atm DESTROY FEAR 
ment. Finally I cut in and asked, 'What are you doing about it) 
What are you trying to do to correct the situation?" 
"Well," he answered, "there isn't muchI can do, I guess, but 
hope for the best." 
To this comment I asked, "Honestly; now; is hope enough?" 
Pausing, but not giving him a chance to answer, I put another 
question to him: "Why not take action to support your hope?" 
"Go on," he said. 
"Well, there are two kinds .of action that seem to fit your 
case. First, start this afternoon to move those sales figures 
upward. We've got to face it. There's a reason your sales are 
slipping. Find it. Maybe you need a special sale to clear out your 
slow-moving merchandise, so you'll be in a position to buy some 
ftesh stock. Perhaps you can rearrange your display counters. 
Maybe your salespeople need more enthusiasm.' I can't pin­
point what will turn your sales volume upward, but something 
will. And it would probably be wise to talk privately with your 
merchandise manager. He may be on the verge of putting you 
out, but when you talk it over with him and ask his advice, he'll 
certainly give you more time to work things out. It's too expen­
sive for the store to replace you as long as top management feels 
there's a chance you'll fmd a solution." 
I went on, "Then get your assistant buyers on the ball. Quit 
acting like a drowning man. Let people around you know that 
you're still alive." 
Courage was again in his eyes. Then he asked, "You said 
there are two kinds of action I should take. What's the second)" 
"The second type of action, which you might say is an 
insutance policy; is to let two or three of your closest business 
fi-iends in the trade know you might consider an offer from 

--- Page 59 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR .3 
another store, assuming, of course, it is substantially better than 
your present job. 
"I don't believe your job will be insecure after you take 
some affirmative action to get those sales figures on the rise. But 
just in case, it's good to have an offer or two. Remember, it's ten 
times easier for a man with a job toget another job than it is for 
someone unemployeq to connect." 
Two days ago this once-troubled executive called me. 
"After ourtaikI buckled down. I made a number of changes, 
but the most basic one was with my salespeople. I used to hold 
sales meetings once a week, but now I'm holding one every 
morning. I've got those people really enthusiastic. I guess once 
they saw some life in me they were ready to push harder too. 
They were just waiting for me to start things moving again. 
"Things sure are working out okay. Last week my sales 
were well ahead of a year ago and much better than the store's 
average. 
"Oh, by the way," he continued, "I want to tell you some 
other good news. I got two job offers since we talked. Naturally 
I'm glad, but I've turned them both down since everything is 
looking good here again." 
When we face tough problems, we stay mired in. the mud 
until we take action. Hope is a start. But hope needs action to 
win victories. 
Put the action ptinciple to work. Next time you experience 
big fear or little fear, steady yourself Then search for an answer to 
this question: What kind of action can I take to conquer my fear? 
Isolate your fear. Then take appropriate action. 
Below are some examples of fear and some possible action 
cures. 

--- Page 60 ---
54 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
TYPE OF FEAR 
1. Embarrassment because of 
personal appearance. 
2. Fear of losing an important 
customer. ACTION 
Improve it. Go to a barbershop 
or beauty salon. Shine your 
shoes. Get your clothes cleaned 
and pressed. In general, prac­
tice better grooming. It doesn't 
always take new clothes. 
Work doubly hard to give better. 
service. Correct anything tha t 
may have caused customers to 
lose confidence in you. 
3. Fear of failing an examination. Convert worry tiIl}.e into study 
4. Fear of dungs totally beyond 
your control. 
5. Fear of being physically hurt 
by something you can't con­
trol, such as a tornado or an 
airplane out o,f control. 
6. Fear of what other people 
may think and say. time. 
'fum your attention to helping 
to relieve the fear of others. 
Pray. 
Switch your attention to some~ 
thing totally difterent. Go out 
into your yard and pull up 
weeds. Play with your children. 
Go to a movie. 
Make sure that what you plan to 
do is right. Then do it. No one 
ever does anything worthwhile 
for which he is not criticized. 
7. Fear of making an investment Analyze all factors. Then be 
or purchasing a home. decisive. Make a decision and 
stick with it. Trust your own 
judgment. 
8. Fear of people. Put them in proper perspective. 
Remember, the other person is 
just another human being pretty 
much like yourself 

--- Page 61 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 55 
Use this two-step procedure to cure fear and win confidence: 
1. Isolate your fear. Pin it down. Determine exactly what you 
are afraid of. 
2. Then take action. There is some kind of action for any kind 
of fear. 
And remember, hesitation only enlarges, magnifies the fear. 
Take action promptly. Be decisive. 
Much lack of self-confidence can be traced directly to a misman­
aged memory. 
Your brain is very much like a bank. Every day you make 
thought deposits in your "mind bank." These thought deposits 
grow and become your memory. When you settle down to think 
or when you face a problem, in effect you say to your memory 
bank, ''What do I already know about this?" 
Your memory bank automatically answers and supplies 
you with bits of information relating to this situation that you 
deposited on previous occasions. Your memory; then, is the basic 
supplier of raw material for your new thought. 
The teller in your memory bank is tremendously reliable. 
He never crosses you up. If you approach him and say; "Mr. Teller, 
let me withdraw some thoughts I deposited in the past proving 
I'm inferior to just about everybody else," he'll say; "Certainly; sir. 
Recall how you failed two times previously when you tried this? 
Recall what your sixth-grade teacher told you about your inabil­
ity to accomplish things ... Recall what you overheard some 
fellow workers saying about you ... Recall ... " 

--- Page 62 ---
56 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
And on and on Mr. Teller goes, digging out of your brain 
thought after thought that proves you are inadequate. 
But suppose you visit your memory teller with this request: 
"Mr. Teller, I face a difficult decision. Can you supply me with 
any thoughts which will give me reassurance?" 
And again Mr. Teller says, "Certainly, sir," but this time 
he delivers thoughts you deposited earlier that say you can 
succeed. "Recall the excellent job you did in a similar situation 
before .... Recall how much confidence Mr. Smith placed in 
you .... Recall what your good friends said about you .... Re-
call ... " 
Mr. Teller, perfectly responsive, lets you withdraw the 
thought deposits you want to withdraw. After all; it is your 
bank. 
Here are two specific things to do to build confidence 
through efficient management of your memory bank. 
1. Oeposit only positive thoughts in your memory bank. Let's face it 
squarely: everyone encounters plenry of unpleasant, embarrass­
ing, and discouraging situations. But unsuccessful and success­
ful people deal with these situations in directly opposite ways. 
Unsuccessful people take them to heart, so to speak. They dwell 
on the unpleasant situations, thereby giving them a good start in 
their memory. They don't take their minds away from them. At 
night the unpleasant situation is the last thing they think about. 
Confident, successful people, on the other hand, "don't 
give it another thought." Successful people specialize in putting 
positive thoughts into their memory bank. 
What kind of performance would your car deliver if every 
morning before you left for work you scooped np a double hand-

--- Page 63 ---
BUILD CDIIFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 57 
ful of dirt and put it into your crankcase? That fIne engine would 
soon be a mess, unable to do what you want it to do. Negative, 
unpleasant thoughts deposited in your mind affect your mind the 
same way. Negative thoughts produce needless wear and tear on 
your mental motor. They create worry, fi'ustration, and feelings 
of. inferiority. They put you beside the road while others drive 
ahead. 
00 this: in these moments when you're alone with your 
thoughts-when you're driving your carol' eating alone-recall 
pleasant, positive experiences. Put good thoughts in your mem­
ory bank. This boosts confIdence. It gives you that "I-sure-feel­
good" feeling. It helps keep your body functioning right, too. 
Here is an excellent plan. Just before you go to sleep, 
deposit good thoughts in your memory bank. Count your bless­
ings. Recall the many good things you have to be thankful for: 
your wife or husband, your children, your friends, your health. 
Recall the good things you saw people do today. Recall your little 
victories and accomplishments. Go over the reasons why you are 
glad to be alive. 
2. Withdraw only positive thoughts from your memory bank. I was 
closely associated several years ago in Chicago with a fIrm of 
psychological consultants. They handled many types of cases, 
but mostly marriage problems and psychological adjustment 
situations, all dealing with mind matters. 
One afternoon as I was talking with the head of the fIrm 
about his profession and his techniques for helping the seriously 
maladjusted person, he made this remark: "You know, there 
would be no need for my services if people would do just one 
thing." 

--- Page 64 ---
58 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
"What's that?" I asked eagerly. 
"Simply this: destroy their negative thoughts before those 
thoughts become mental monsters." 
"Most individuals I try to help," he continued, "are operat­
ingtheir own private museum of mental horror. Many marriage 
difficulties, for example, involve the 'honeymoon monster.' The 
honeymoon wasn't as satisfactory as one or both of the marriage 
partners had hoped, but instead of burying the memory, they 
reflected on it hundreds of times ~ntil it was a giant obstacle to 
successful marital relationships. They come to me as much as 
five or ten years later. 
'Usually, of course, my clients don't see where their trouble 
lies. It's my job to uncover and explain the source of their diffi­
culty to them and help them to see what a triviality it really is. 
''A person can make a mental monster out of almost any 
unpleasant happening," my psychologist friend went on. ''A job 
failure, a jilted romance, a bad investment, disappointment in the 
behavior of a teenage child-these are common monsters I have 
to help troubled people destroy." 
It is clear that any negative thought, if fertilized with 
repeated recall, can develop into a real mind monster, breaking 
down confidence and paving the way to serious psychological 
difficulties. 
In an article in Cosmopolitan magazine, "The Drive Toward 
Self-Destruction," Alice Mulcahey pointed out that upward 
of 30,000 Americans commit suicide each year and another 
100,000 attempt to take their own lives. She went on to say, 
"There is shocking· evidence that millions of other people are 
killing themselves by slower, less obvious methods. Still others 
are committing spiritual rather than physical suicide, constantly , 

--- Page 65 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 59 
seeking out ways to humiliate, punish, and generally diminish 
themselves." 
The psychologist. friend mentioned before told me how 
he helped one of his patients to stop committing "mental and 
spiritual suicide." "This patient," he explained, "was in her late 
thirties and had two children. In lay terminology she suffered 
from severe depression. She looked back on every incident of 
her life as being an unhappy experience. Her school days, her 
marriage, the bearing of her children, the places she had lived 
all were thought of negatively. She volunteered that she couldn't 
remember ever having been truly happy. And since what one 
remembers from the past colors what one sees in the present, she 
saw nothing but pessimism and darkness. 
"When I asked her what she saw in a picture which I 
showed hel; she said, 'It looks like there will be a terrible thun­
derstorm tonight.' That was the gloomiest interpretation of the 
picture I've yet heard." (The picture was a large oil painting of 
the sun low in the sky and a jagged, rocky coastline. The paint­
ing was very cleverly done and could be construed to be either' 
a sunrise or a sunset. The psychologist commented to me that 
what a person sees in the picture is a clue to his personality. Most 
people say it is a sunrise. But the depressed, mentally disturbed 
person nearly always says it's a sunset.) 
':As a psychologist, I can't change what already is in a per­
son's memory. But I can, with the patient's cooperation, help the 
individual to see his past in a different light. That's the general 
treatment I used on this woman. I worked with her to help her to 
see joy and pleasure in her past instead of total disappointment. 
After six months she began to show improvement. At that point, 
I gave her a special assignment. Each day I asked her to think of 

--- Page 66 ---
60 BUILD CONFIDENCE Arm OESTROY FEAR 
and write down three specific reasons she has to be happy. Then 
at her next appointment with me on Thursdays r d go over her 
list with her. I continued this sort of treatment for three months. 
Her improvement was very satisfactory. Today that woman is 
very well adjusted ro !;leI' situation. She's positive and certainly as 
'happy as most people." 
When this woman quit drawing negatives from her mem­
ory bank, she was headed toward recovery. 
Whether the psychological problem is big or little, the cure 
comes when one learns to quit drawing negatives from one's 
memory bank and withdraws positives instead. 
Don't build mental monsters. Refuse to withdraw the 
unpleasant thoughts from your memory bank. When you 
remember sitmttions of any kind, concentrate on the good part 
of the experience; forget the bad. Bury it. If you find yourself 
thinking about the negative side, turn your mind ofr com­
pletely. 
And here is something very significant and very encourag­
ing. Your mind wants you to forget the unpleasant. If you will 
just cooperate, unpleasant memories will gradually shrivel and 
the teller in your memory bank will cancel them out. 
Dr. Melvin,S. Hattwick, noted advertising psychologist, in 
commenting on our ability to remember, says, "When the feel­
ing aroused is pleasant, the advertisement has a better chance 
to be remembered. When the feeling aroused is unpleasant, the 
reader or listener tends to forget the advertisement message. 
The unplea~ant runs counter to what we want, we don't want 
to remember it." 
In brief, it really is easy to forget the unpleasant if we sim­
ply refuse to recall it. Withdraw only positive thoughts from your 

--- Page 67 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 61 
memory bank. Let the others fade away. And your confidence, 
that feeling of being on top of the world, will zoom upward. You 
take a big step forward toward conquering fear when you refuse 
to remember negative, self-deprecating thoughts. 
Why do people fear other people? Why do many folks feel 
self-conscious around others? What's behind shyness? What can 
we do about it? 
Fear of other people is a big fear. But there is a way to con­
quer it. You can conquer fear of people if you will learn to put 
them into proper perspective. 
A business friend, who is doing exceptionally well operat­
ing his own wood-novelty plant, explained to me how he got the 
proper perspective of people. His example is interesting. 
"Before I went into the army in World War II, I was scared of 
just about everybody. You just wouldn't believe how shy and timid 
I was. I felt everyone else was a lot smarter. I worried about my 
physical and mental inadequacies. I thought I was born to fail. 
"Then by some fortunate quirk of fate I lost my fear of 
people in the Army. During part of 1942 and 1943, when the 
Army was inducting men at a terrific clip, I was stationed as a 
medic at one of the big induction centers. Day after day I assisted 
in examining those men. The more I looked at these recruits, the 
less afraid of people I became. 
'1\.11 those lPen lined up by the hundreds, naked as jaybirds, 
looked so much alike. Oh sure, there were fat ones and skinny 
ones, tall ones and short ones, but they all were confused, all 
were lonesome. Just a few days before some of these were ris­
ing young executives. Some were farmers, some were salesmen, 
drifters, blue-collar workers. A few days before they had been 
many things. But at the induction center they were all alike. 

--- Page 68 ---
62 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
"I figured out something pretty basic back then. I discov­
ered people are alike in many, many more ways than they are 
different. I discovered the other fellow is pretty much like me. He 
likes good food, he misses his family and fi'iends, he wants to get 
ahead, he has problems, he likes to relax. So if the. other fellow is 
basically like me, there's no point in being afi'aid of him." 
Novl, doesn't that make sense? If the other fellow is basi­
cally like me, there's no reason to be afraid of him. 
Here are two ways to put people in propel' perspective: 
1. Get a balanced view of the other fellow. Keep these two points 
in mind when dealing with people: first, the other fellow is 
important. Emphatically, he is important. Every human being 
is. But remember this, also: You are important, too. So when you 
meet another person, make it a policy to think, "We're just two 
important people sitting down to discuss something of mutual 
interest and benefit." 
A couple of months ago, a business executive phoned to 
tell me he had just employed a young man whom I had recom­
mended to him shortly before. "Do you know what really sold 
me on that fellow?" asked my friend. "What?" I asked. "Well, 
it was the way he handled himself. Most job applicants when 
they walk in here are half scared. They give me all the answers 
they think I want to hear. In a way, most job applicants are 
a little like beggars-they'll accept anything, and they aren't 
particular. 
"But G. handled himself differently. He respected me, but 
what's just as important, he respects himself. What's more, he 
asked me as many questions as I asked him. He's no mouse. He's 
a real man, and he's going to do all right." 

--- Page 69 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND OESTROYFEAR 63 
This mutually important attitude helps you keep the situa­
tion balanced. The other fellow does not become too important 
relative to you in your thinking. 
The other fellow might look frightfully big, frightfully 
important. But remember, he is still a human being with essen­
tially the same interests, desires, and problems as you. 
2. Develop an understanding attitude. People who want figuratively 
to bite you, growl at you, pick on you, and otherwise chop you 
down are not rare. If you're not prepared for people like that, 
they can punch big holes in your confidence and make you feel 
completely defeated. You need a defense against the adult bully, 
the fellow who likes to throw his meager weight around. 
A few months ago, at the reservations desk of a Memphis 
hotel, I saw an excellent demonstration of the right way to 
handle folks like this. 
It was shortly after 5 P.M., and the hotel was busy registeting 
new guests. The fellow ahead of me gave his name to the clerk 
in a commanding way. The clerk said, "Yes sir, Mr. R., we have a 
fme Single for you." 
"Single)" shouted the fellow. "I ordered a double." 
The clerk said, very politely, "Let me check, sir." He pulled 
the guest's reservation from the ftle and said, "I'm sorry, sir. Your 
telegram specified a single. I'd be happy to put you in a double 
room, sir, if we had any available. But we simply do not." 
Then the irate customer said, "I don't care what the h-­
that piece of paper says, I want a double." 
Then he started in with that "do-you-know-who-I-aml" 
bit, followed with ''I'll have you fired. You'll see, I'll have you 
fired." 

--- Page 70 ---
64 BUilD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
As best he could, under the verbal tornado, the young clerk 
injected, "Sir, we're terribly sorry; but we acted on your instruc­
tions,j, 
Finally the customer, really furious now, said, "I wouldn't 
stay in the best suite in this - -hotel now that I know how 
badly managed it is," and stormed out. 
I stepped up to the desk, thinking the clerk, who had taken 
one of the worst public tongue-lashings I'd seen in some time, 
would be upset. Instead he greeted me with one of the frnest 
"Good evening, sir" s I'd ever heard. As he went through the rou­
tine of processing my room, I said to him, "I certainly admire the 
way you handled yourself just a moment ago. You have tremen­
dous temper control." 
"Well, sir," he said, "I really can't get mad at a fellow like 
that. You see, he really isn't mad at me. I was just the scapegoat. 
The po,?r fellow may be in bad trouble with his wife, or his 
business may be off, or maybe he feels inferior and this was' his 
golden chance to feel like a wheel. I'm just the guy who gave him 
a chance to get something out of his system." 
The clerk added, "Underneath he's probably a very nice 
guy. Most folks are." 
Walking toward the elevators, I caught myself repeating 
aloud, "Underneath he's probably a very nice guy. Most folks 
are." 
Remember those two short sentences next time someone 
declares war on you. Hold your ftre. The way to win in situations 
like this is to let the other fellow blow his stack and then forget it. 
Several years ago, whlle checking student examination papers, I 
came across one that especially disturbed me. The student who 

--- Page 71 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE ANO DESTROY FEAR 65 
wrote the examination had demonstrated in class discussions and 
previous tests that he was far better qualified than his paper indi­
cated, He was, in fact, the fellow who I thought would finish at 
the top of the class, Instead his paper put him at the bottom, All 
was my custom in such cases, I had my secretary call the student 
and ask him to come by my office on an urgent matter, 
Paul W. appeared shortly. He looked as though he had been 
through a terrible experience, After he was comfortably seated, 
I said to him, "What happened, Paul? This just isn't the quality 
paper I expected you to write," 
Paul struggled with himself, looked in the direction of his 
feet and replied, "Sir, after I saw that you had spotted me cheat­
ing, I just went to pieces, I couldn't concentrate on anything, 
Honest, this is the first time I've ever cheated at the university. I 
desperately wanted an A, so 1 worked up a little pony to use," 
He was terribly upset, But now that he was talking, he 
wouldn't stop, "1 suppose you'll have to recommend me for 
dismissal. The university rule says any student found cheating in 
any manner is subject to permanent dismissal." 
Here Paul started bringing up the shame this incident would 
bring to his family, how it would wreck his life, and all sorts of 
repercussions, Finally I said, "Hold it, now; Slow down, Let me 
explain something, 1 didrit see you cheat, Until you walked in 
and told me, 1 hadn't the faintest idea that was the trouble, I am 
sorry, Paul, that you did," 
Then 1 continued, "Paul, tell me, just what do you want to 
gain from your university experience)" 
He was a little calmer now, and after a short pause he said, 
"Well, Doctor, I think my overall aim is to learn how to live, but 
1 guess I'm failing pretty badly," 

--- Page 72 ---
66 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
"We learn in different ways," I said. "I think you can learn a 
real success lesson from this experience. 
'When you used your pony in there, your conscience 
bothered you terribly. This gave you a guilt complex that in turn 
broke your confidence. As you expressed it, you went to pieces. 
"Most of the time, Paul, this matter of right and wrong is 
approached from a moral or religious standpoint. Now, under­
stand, I'm not here to preach to you, give you a sermon about 
right and wrong. But let's look at the practical side. When you do 
anything that goes contrary to your conscience, you feel guilty. 
and this guilty feeling jams your thought processes. You can't 
think straight because your mind is asking 'Will I get caught? 
Will I get caught)' 
"Paul," I continued, "you wanted an A so badly you did 
something you knew was wrong. There are many times in life 
when you'll want to make an A so badly you'll be tempted to 
do something that is contrary to your conscience. For example, 
someday you may want to make a sale so badly you'll think of 
deliberately misleading the customer to buy. And you may sue· 
ceed. But here's what will happen. Your guilty feeling will grab 
hold of you and the next time you see your customer, you'll be 
self· conscious, ill at ease. You'll be wondering 'Has he discovered 
that I put something over)' Your presentation will be ineffective 
because you can't concentrate. Chances are you'll never make 
the second, third, fourth, and the many repeat sales. In the long 
run, making that sale using tactics that hurt your conscience will 
cost you a lot of income." 
I went on and pointed out to Paul how an occasional business 
or professional man loses his grip because of an intense fear that his 
wife will learn about a secret love affair he is having with another 

--- Page 73 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE ArID DESTROY FEAR 67 
woman. "Will she fmd out? Will she fmd out?" eats away the man's 
confidence until he can't do a good job at work or in the home. 
'] reminded Paul that many criminals are captured not 
because any clues point to them but because they act guilty and 
self-conscious. Their guilt feeling puts them on the suspect list. 
There is within each of us·a desire to be right, think right, 
and act right. When we go against that desire, we put a cancer in 
our conscience. This cancer grows and grows by eating away at 
our confidence. Avoid doing anything that will cause you to ask 
yourself, 'Will] get caught? will they fmd out? Will ] get away 
with it?" 
Don't try to make an A if it means violating your confi­
dence. 
Paul, I'm pleased to say, got the point. He learned the prac­
tical value of doing what's right. ] then proposed he sit down 
and retake the examination. ]n answer to his question "But what 
about my dismissal?" ] said, "I know what the regulations say 
about cheating. But, you know, if we dismissed all students who 
have cheated in any way, half the professors would have to leave. 
And if we dismissed all students who thought about cheating, 
the university would have to shut down. 
"So I'm forgetting this whole incident if you'll do me a 
favor." 
"Gladly," he said. 
1 walked over to my bookshelf, took down my personal 
copy of Fifty Years with the Golden Rule, and said, "Paul, read this 
book and return it. See how, in J. C. Penney's own words, just 
doing what's right made him one of America's richest men." 
Doing what's right keeps your conscience satisfied. And this 
builds self-confidence. When we do what is known to be wrong, 

--- Page 74 ---
68 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
two negative things happen. First, we feel guilt and this guilt eats 
away confidence. Second, other people sooner or later fmd out 
and lose confidence in us. 
Do what's right and keep your confidence. That's thinking 
yourself to success. 
Here is a psychological principle that is worth reading over 
twenty-five times. Read it until it absolutely saturates you: To 
think COl!fldently, act cOIif'ulently. 
The great psychologist Dr. George W Crane said in his 
famous book Applied Psychology, "Remember, motions are the 
precursors of emotions. You can't control the latter directly but 
only through your choice of motions or actions .... To avoid 
this all too common ttagedy (marital difficulties and misunder­
standings) become aware of the true psychological facts. Go 
through the proper motions each day and you'll soon begin to 
feel the corresponding emotions! Just be sure you and your mate 
go through those motions of dates and kisses, the phrasing of 
sincere daily compliments, plus the many other little courtesies, 
and you need not worry about the emotion of love. You can't act 
devoted for very long without feeling devoted." 
Psychologists tell us we can change our attitudes by chang­
ing our physical actions. For example, you actually feel more 
like smiling if you make yourself smile. You feel more superior 
when you make yourself stand tall than when you slouch. On the 
negative side, frown a really bitter frown and see if you don't feel 
more like frowning. 
It is easy to prove that managed motions can change emo­
tions. People who are shy in introducing themselves can replace 
this timidity with confidence just by taking three simple 'actions 

--- Page 75 ---
· BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 69 
simultaneously: First, reach for the other person's hand and clasp 
it warmly. Second, look directly at the other person. And third, 
say, 'T m very glad to know you." 
These three simple actions automatically ,and instanta­
neously banish shyness. Confident action produces confident 
thinking, 
So, to think confidently, act confidently. Act the way you 
want to feel. Below are five confidence-building exercises, Read 
these guides carefully. Then make a conscious effort to practice 
them and build your confidence. 
1. Be a front seater. Ever notice in meetings-in church, class­
rooms, and other kinds of assemblies-how the back seats fill up 
first? Most folks scramble to sit in the back rows so they won't 
be "too conspicuous." And the reason they are afraid to be con· 
spicuous is that they lack confidence. 
Sitting up front builds confidence. Practice it. From 'now 
on make it a rule to sit as close to the front as you can. Sure, you 
may be a little more conspicuous in the front, but remember, 
there is nothing inconspicuous about success. 
2. Practice making eye contact. How a person uses his eyes tells us 
a lot about him. Instinctively, you ask yourself questions about 
the fellow who doesn't look you in the eye. "What's he trying to 
hide? What's he afraid of? Is he trying to put something over on 
me? Is he holding something back?" 
Usually, failure to make eye contact says one of two things. 
It may say, "I feel weak 'beside you. I feel inferior to you. I'm 
afraid of you." Or avoiding another person's eyes may say, "I feel 

--- Page 76 ---
70 BUilD COI{FIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
guilty. I've done something or I've thought something that I don't 
want you to know. I'm afraid if I let my eyes connect with yours, 
you'll see through me." 
You say nothing good about yourself when you avoid mak­
ing eye contact. You say, 'T mafraid. I lack confidence." Conquer 
this fear by making yourself look the other person in the eyes. 
Looking the other person in the eye tells him, "I'm honest 
and aboveboard. I believe in what I'm telling you. I'm not afraid. 
I'm confident." 
Make your eyes work for you. Aim them right at the other 
person's eyes. It not only gives you confidence, it wins you con­
fidence, too. 
3. Walk 25 percent faster. When I was a youngster, just going to 
the county seat was a big treat. After all the errands were accom­
plished and we were back in the cal; my mother would often say, 
"Davey, let's just sit here a while and watch the people walk by." 
Mother was an excellent game player. She'd say, "See that 
fellow; What do you suppose is troubling him)" Or "What do you 
think that lady there is going to do)" or "Look at that person. He 
just seems to be in a fog." 
Watching people walk and move about became real fun. It 
was a lot cheaper than the movies (which was one of the reasons, 
I learned later, that Mother developed the game), and it was a lot 
more instructive. 
I still am a walk watcher. In corridors, lobbies, on sidewalks 
I still occasionally fmd myself studying human behavior simply 
by watching people move about. 
Psychologists link slovenly posture and sluggish walk­
ing to unpleasant attitudes towards oneself, work, and the 

--- Page 77 ---
BUILD CONFIDElICE AND DESTROY FEAR 71 
people around us. But psychologists also tell us you can actu­
ally change your attitudes by changing your posture and speed 
of movement. Watch, and you discover that body action is the 
result of mind action. The extremely beaten people, the real 
down-and-outers, just shuffle and stumble along. They have 
zero self-confidence. 
Average people have the "average" walk. Their pace is 
"average." They have the look of "I really don't have very much 
pride in myself." 
Then there's a third group. Persons in this group show 
superconfidence. They walk faster than the average. There 
seems to be a slight sprint in the way they walk. Their walk 
tells the world, 'Tve got someplace important to go, something 
important to do. What's more, I will succeed at what I will do 
fifteen minutes ftom now." 
Use the walk-25-percent-faster technique to help build self­
confidence. Throw your shoulders back, lift up your head, move 
ahead just a little faster, and feel self-confidence grow. 
Just try and see . 
. 4, Practice speaking up. In working with many kinds of groups of 
all sizes, I've watched many persons with keen perception and 
much native ability freeze and fail to participate in discussions. 
It isn't that these folks don't want to get in and wade with the 
rest. Rather, it's a simple lack of confidence. 
The conference clam thinks to himself, "My opinion is proba­
bly worthless. If I say something, I'll probably look foolish. I'll just 
say nothing. Besides, the others in the group probably know more 
than 1. I don't want the others to know how ignorant I am." 
Each time the conference clam fails to speak, he feels even more 

--- Page 78 ---
72 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
inadequate, more inferior. Often he makes a faint promise to himself 
(that down deep he knows he won't keep) to speak "next time." 
This is very important: each time our clam fails to speak, he 
takes one more dose of confidence poison. He becomes less and 
less confident of himself 
But on the positive side, the more you speak up, the more 
you add to your confidence, and the easier it is to speak up the 
next time. Speak up. It's a confidence-building vitamin. 
Put this confidence builder to use. Make it a rule to speak 
up at every open meeting you attend. Speak up, say something 
volulltarily at every business conference, committee meeting, 
community forum you attend. Make no exception. Comment, 
make a suggestion, ask a question. And don't be the last to speak. 
Try to be the icebreaker, the first one in with a comment. 
And never worry about looking foolish. You won't. For 
each person who doesn't agree with you, odds are another per­
son will. Quit asking yourself, "I wonder if I dare speake" 
Instead, concentrate on getting the discussion leader's 
attention so you call speak. 
For special training and experience in speaking, consider 
joining your local toastmaster's club. Thousands of conscien­
tious people have developed confidence through a planned pro­
gram to feel at ease talking with people and to people. 
5. Smile big. Most folks have heard at one time or another that 
a smile will give them a real boost. They've been told that a 
smile is excellent medicine for confidence deficiency. But lots of 
people still don't really believe this because they've never tried 
smiling when they feel fear. 

--- Page 79 ---
BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 73 
Make this little test. Try to feel defeated and smile big at 
the same time. You can't. A big smile gives you confidence. A big 
smile beats feal; rolls away worry, defeats despondency. 
And a real smile does more than cure just your ill feeling. 
A real smile melts away the opposition of others-and instantly, 
too. Another person simply can't be angry with you if you give 
him a big, sincere smile. Just the other day, a little incident hap­
pened to me that illustrates this. I was parked at an intersection 
waiting for the light to change when BAM! The driver behind 
me had let his foot slip the brake and put my rear bumper to a 
test. I looked back through my mirror and saw him getting out. 
I got out, too, and, forgetting the rule book, started p~eparing 
myself for verbal combat. I confess I was ready verbally to bite 
him to pieces. 
But fortunately, before I got the chance, he walked up to 
me, smiled, and said in the most earnest voice, "Friend, I really 
didn't mean to do that." That smile, matched with his sincere 
comment, melted me. I mumbled something about "That's O.K. 
Happens all the time." Almost in less time than it takes to wink 
an eye, my opposition turned into friendship. 
Smile big and you feelllke "happy days are here again." But 
smile big. A half-developed smile is not fully guaranteed. Smile 
until your teeth show. That large-size smile is fully guaranteed. 
I've heard many times, ''Yes, but when I fear something, or 
when I'm angry, I don't feel like smiling." 
Of course you don't. No one does. The trick is to tell your­
self forcefully, 'Tm going to smile." 
Then smile. 
Harness the power of smiling. 

--- Page 80 ---
74 BUILD CONFIDENCE AND DESTROY FEAR 
PUT THESE FIVE PROCEDURES TO WORK 
FOR YOU 
1. Action cures fear. Isolate your fear and then take construc­
tive action. Inaction-doing nothing about a situation­
strengthens fear and destroys confidence. 
2. Make a supreme effort to put only positive thoughts in 
your memory bank. Don't let negative, self-deprecatory 
thoughts grow into mental monsters. Simply refuse to 
recall unpleasant events or situations. 
3. Put people in proper perspective. Remember, people are 
more alike, much more alike, than they are different. Get a 
balanced view of the other fellow. He is just another human 
being. And develop an understanding attitude. Many people 
will bark, but it's a rare one who bites. 
4. Practice doing what your conscience tells you is right. This 
prevents a poisonous guilt complex from developing. Doing 
what's right is a very practical rule for success. 
5. Make everything about you say, "I'm confident, really con-. 
fident." Practice these little technIques in your day-to-day 
activities: 
Be a front seater. 
Make eye contact. 
Walk 25 percent faster. 
Speak up. 
Smile big. 

--- Page 81 ---
HOWTOTHINK BIG 
RECENTLY I CHATTED WITH a recruitment specialist for one of 
the nation's largest industrial organizations. Four months each 
year she visits college campuses to recruit graduating seniors for 
her company's junior executive training program. The tenor of 
her remarks indicated that she was discouraged about the atti­
tudes of many people she talked with. 
"Most days I interview between eight and twelve college 
seniors, all in the upper third of their class, all at least mildly 
interested in coming with us. One of the main things we want to 
determine in the screening interview is the individual's motiva­
tion. We want to fmd out if he or she is the kind of person who 
can, in a few years, direct major projects, manage a branch office 
or plant, or in some other way make a really substantial contribu­
tion to the company. 
"I must say I'm not too pleased with .the personal objec­
tives of most of those I talk with. You'd be surprised," she went 
on, "how many twenty-two-year-olds are more interested in our 
retirement plan than in anything else we have to offer. A second 
favorite question is 'will I move arouud a lot?' Most of them 

--- Page 82 ---
76 HOW TO THINK BIG 
seem to defme the word slIccess as synonymous with seClirity. Can 
we risk turning our company over to' people like that? 
"The thing I can't understand is why should young people 
these days be so ultraconservative, so narrow in their view of the 
future? Every day there are more sigus of expanding opportunity. 
This country is making record progress in scientific and indus­
trial development. Our population is gaining rapidly. If there ever 
was a time to be bullish about America. it's now." 
The tendency for so many people to think small means 
there is much less competition than you think for a very reward­
ing career. 
Where success is concerned, people are not measured in . 
inches 01' pounds or college degrees, or family background; they 
are measured by the size of their thinking. How big we think 
determines the size of our accomplishments. Now let's see how 
we can enlarge our thinking. 
Ever ask yourself, "What is my greatest weakness)" Probably 
the greatest human weakness is sel£deprecation-that is, selling 
oneself short. Selfdeprecation shows through in coundess ways. 
John sees a job advertisement in the paper; it's exactly what he would 
like. But he does nothing about it because he thinks, 'T m not good 
enough for that job, so why bother?" OrJim wants a date with Joan, 
but he doesn't call her because he thinks he wouldn't rate with her. 
Tom feels Mr. Richards would be a very good prospect for 
his product, but Tom doesn't call. He feels Mr. Richards is too 
big to see him. Pete is filling out a job application form. One 
question asks, "What beginning salary do you expect)" Pete puts 
down .a modest figure pecause he feels he really isn't worth the 
bigger sum that he would like to earn. 
Philosophers for thousands of years have issued good 

--- Page 83 ---
HOW TO THINK BIG 77 
advice: Know thyself. But most people, it seems, interpret this sug­
gestion to mean Know only thy negative self. Most self-evaluation 
consists of making long mental lists of one's faults, shortcom­
ings, inadequacies, 
It's well to know our inabilities, for this shows us areas in 
which we can improve. But if we know only our negative char­
"acteristics, ·we~re in a mess. Our value is small. 
Here is an exercise to help you measure your true size. I've 
used it in training programs for executives and sales personnel. 
It works. 
1. Determine your five chief assets. Invite some objective 
friend to help--possibly your wife, your superior, a profes­
sor-some intelligent person who will give you an honest 
opinion. (Examples of assets frequently listed are educa­
tion, experience, technical skills, appearance, well-adjusted 
home life, attitudes, personality, initiative.) 
2. Next, under each asset, write the names of three persons 
you know who have achieved large success but who do not 
have this asset to as great a degree as you. 
When you've completed this exercise, you will find you 
outrank many successful people on at least one asset. 
There is only one conclusion you can honestly reach: You're 
bigger than you think. So fit your thinking to your true size. Think 
as big as you really are! Never, never, never sell yourself short! 
The person who says "adamantine" when in plain talk he means 
"immovable" or says "coquette" when we would understand 

--- Page 84 ---
78 HOWTOTHINK BIG 
him better if he said "flirt" may have a big vocabulary. But does 
he have a big thinker's vocabulary? Probably not. People who use 
difficult, high-sounding words and phrases that most folks have 
to strain themselves to understand are inclined to be overbearing 
and stuffed shirts. And stuffed shirts are usually small thinkers. 
The important measure of a person's vocabulary is not 
the size or the number of words he uses. Rather, the thing that 
counts, the only thing that counts about one's vocabulary; is the. 
effect his words and phrases have on his own and others' think­
ing. 
Here is something very basic: We do not think ill words and 
phrases. We think only in pict1lres andlor images. Words are the 
raw materials of thought. When spoken or read, that amazing 
instrument, the mind, automatically converts words and phrases 
into mind pictures. Each word, each. phrase, creates a slightly 
different mind picture. If someone tells you, 'Jim bought a new 
split-level," you see one picture. But if you're told, 'Jim bought 
a new ranch house," you see another picture. The mind pictures 
we see are modified by the kinds of words we use to name things 
and describe things. 
Look at it this way. When you speak or write, you are, in a 
sense, a projector showing movies in the minds of others. And 
the pictures you create determine how you and others react. 
Suppose you tell a group of people, "I'm sorry to report 
we've failed." What do these people see? They see defeat and all 
the disappointment and grief the word "failed" conveys. Now 
suppose you said instead, '~Here's a new approach that I think 
will work." They would feel encouraged, ready to try again. 
Suppose you say, "We face a problem." You have created a 
picture in the minds of others .of something difficult, unpleas-

--- Page 85 ---
HOW TO THItlK BIG )9 
ant to solve. Instead say, "We face a challenge," and you create a 
mind picture of fun, sport, something pleasant to do. 
Or tell a group, "We incurred a big expense," and people 
see money spent that will never return. Indeed, this is unpleas­
ant. Instead say, "We made a big investment," and people see 
a picture of something that will return profits later on, a very 
pleasant sight. 
The point is this: Big thinkers are specialists in creating posi­
tive, forward-looking, optimistic pictures in their own minds and 
in the minds of others. To think big, we must lise words and phrases 
that produce big, positive mental images. 
In the left-hand column below are examples of phrases that 
create small, negative, depressing thoughts. In the right-hand col­
umn the same situation is discussed but in a big, positive way. 
As you read these, ask yourself: "What mind pictures do I 
see'?" 
PHRASES THAT CREATE SMAll, PHRASES THAT CREATE BIG, 
NEGATIVE MIND IMAGES POSITIVE MIND IMAGES 
1. It's no use, we're whipped. 
2. I was in that business once and 
failed. Never again. 
3. I've tried but the product 
won't sell. People don't want 
it. We're not whipped yet. Let's 
keep, trying. Here's a new angle. 
r went broke but it was my own 
·fault. I'm going to try again. 
So far I've not been able to sell 
this product. But I know it is 
good and I'm going to fmd the 
formula that will put it over. 

--- Page 86 ---
80 HOWTOTHIlIK BIG 
PHRASES THAT CREATE SMAll, 
NEGATIVE MIND IMAGES 
4. The market is saturated. 
Imagine, 75 percent of the 
potential has already been 
sold. Better get out. 
5. Their orders have been small. 
Cut them off. 
6. Five years is too long a time 
to spend before I'll get into 
the top ranks in your com­
pany. Count me out. 
7. The competition has all the 
advantage. How do you 
expect me to sell against 
them? 
8. Nobody will ever Want that 
product. 
9 . Lees wait until a recession 
comes along, then buy stocks. 
10. I'm too young (old) for the 
job. 
11. It won't work, let me prove 
it. The image: dark, gloom, 
disappointment, grief, failure. PHRASES THAT CREATE BIG, 
POSITIVE MIND IMAGES 
.Imagine, 25 percent of the mar­
ket is still ,not sold. Count me 
in. This looks big! 
Their orders have been small. 
Let's map out a plan for selling 
them more of their needs. 
Five years is not really a long 
time. Just think, that leaves me 
thirty years to serve at a high 
level. 
Competition is strong. There's 
no denying that, but no one 
ever has all the advantages. 
Let's put our heads together 
and figure out a way to beat 
them at their own game. 
In its present form. it may not 
be salable, but let's consider 
some modifications. 
Let's invest now. Bet on pros­
perity, not depression. 
Being young (old) is a distinct 
advantage. 
It will work, let me prove it. 
The image: bright, hope, suc­
cess, fun, victory. 

--- Page 87 ---
HOW TO THINK BIG 81 
FOUR WAYS TO DEVELOP THE BIG THINKER'S 
VOCABULARY 
Here are four ways to help you develop a big thinker's vQcabu­
lary. 
1. Use big, positive, cheerful words and phrases to describe 
how you feel. When someone asks, "How de you feel 
today?" and you respond with an ''I'm tired (I have a 
headache, I wish it were Saturday, I don't feel so good)," 
you actually make yourself feel worse. Practice this: it's 
a very simple poiut, but it has tremendous power. Every 
time someone asks you, "How are you)" or "How are you 
feeling today?" respond with a 'Just wonderfi!l! thanks, and 
you)" or say "Great" or "Fine." Say you feel wonderful at 
every possible opportunity, and you will begiu to feel won­
derful-and bigger, too. Become known as a person who 
always feels ·great. It wins friends. 
2. Use bright, cheerful, favorable words and phrases to 
describe other people. Make it a rule to have a big, posi­
tive word for all your .friendsand associates. When you 
and someone else are discussiug an absent third party, be 
sure you compliment him with big words and phrases like 
"He's really a fine fellow;" "They tell me he's workiug out 
wonderfitlly well." Be extremely careful to avoid the petty 
cut-him-down language. Sooner or later third parties hear 
what's been said, and then such taik only cuts you down. 
3. Use positive language to encourage others. Complim~nt 
people personally at every opportunity, Everyone you know 

--- Page 88 ---
82 HOWTO THINK BIG 
craves praise. Have a special good word for your wife or 
husband every day. Notice and compliment the people who 
work with you. Praise, sincerely administered, is a success 
tool. Use it! Use it agaiu and again and again. Compliment 
people on their appearance, their work; their achievements, 
their families. 
4. Use positive words to outline plans to others. When 
people hear somethiug like this: "Here is some good news. 
We ·face a genuine opportunity ... " their minds start to 
sparkle. But when they hear something like "Whether 
we like it or not, we've got a job to do," the miud movie 
is dull and boring, and they react accordingly. Promise 
victory and watch eyes light up. Promise victory and win 
support. Build castles, don't dig graves! 
SEE WHAT CAN BE, NOT JUST WHAT IS 
Big thinkers traiu themselves to see not just what is but what can 
be. Here are four examples to illustrate this poiut. 
1. What gives real estate value? A highly successful Realtor who 
specializes in rural property shows what can be done if we train 
ourselves to see something where little or nothing presently 
exists. 
"Most of the rural property around here," my friend began, 
"is run-down and not very attractive. I'm successful because 1 
don't try to sell my prospects a farm as it is. 
"I develop my entire sales plan around what the farm can 
be. Simply telling the prospect, 'The farm has XX acres of bot­
tom land and xx acres of woods and is XX miles from town: 

--- Page 89 ---
HOWTOTHItIK BIG 83 
doesn't stir him up and make him want to, buy it. But when you 
show him a concrete plan for doing something with the farm, 
he's just about sold. Here, let me show you what I mean." 
He opened his briefcase and pulled out a file. "This farm," 
he said, "is a new listing with us. It's like a lot of them. It's forty­
three miles from the center of the metropolitan area, the house 
is run-down, and the place hasn't been farmed in five years. Now, 
here's what I've d~ne. I spent two full days on the place last week, 
just studying it. I walked over the place several times. I looked 
at neighboting farms. I studied the location of the farm with 
respect to existing and planned highways. I asked myself, 'What's 
this farm good for?' 
"I came up with three possibilities. Here they are." He 
showed them to me. Each plan was neatly typed and looked 
quite comprehensive. One plan suggested converting the farm 
into a riding stable. The plan showed why the idea was sound: a 
growing city, more love for the outdoors, more money for rec­
reation, good roads. 'Iheplan also showed how the farm could 
support a sizable number of horses so that the revenue from the 
rides would be largely clear. The whole riding stable igea was 
very thorough, very convincing. The plan was so clear and con­
vincing, I could "see" a dozen couples riding horseback through 
the trees. 
In similar fashion this enterprising salesman developed a 
second thorough plan for a tree farm and a third plan for a com­
bination tree and poultry farm. 
"Now when I talk with my prospects, I won't have to con­
vince them that the farm is a good buy as it is. I help them to see 
a picture of the farm changed into a moneymaking proposition. 
"Besides selling more farms and selling them faster, my 

--- Page 90 ---
84 HOWTOTHItlK BIG 
method of selling the property for what it can be pays off in 
another way: ] can sell a farm at a higher price than my com­
petitors. People naturally pay more for acreage and an idea than 
they do for just acreage. Because of this, more people want to 
list their farms with me and my commission on each sale is 
larger. 
The moral is this: Look at things not as they are, but as they can 
be. Visualization adds value to everything. A big thinker always visual­
izes what can be done in the jilture. He isn't stuck with the present. 
2. How much is a customer worth? A department store executive 
was addressing a conference of merchandise managers. She was 
saying, "] may be a little old-fashioned, but] belong to the school 
that believes the best way to get customers to come back is to 
give them friendly, courteous service. One day] was walking 
through our store when] overheard a salesperson arguing with 
a customer. The customer left in quite a huff. 
':Afterwards, the salesperson said to another, 'I'm not going 
to let a $1.98 customer take up all my time and make me take 
the store apart trying to find him what he wants. He's simply not 
worth it: 
"] walked away," the executive continued, "but] couldn't 
get that remark out of my mind. ]t is pretty serious, ] thought, 
when our salespeople think of customers as being in the $1.98 
category. ] decided right then that this concept must be changed. 
When] got back to my office, ] called our research director and 
asked him to find out how much the average customer spent in 
our store last year. The figUre he came up with surprised even 
me. According to our research director's caref';!l calculation, the 
typical customer spent $362 in our establishment. 

--- Page 91 ---
HOWTOTHINK BIG 85 
"The' next thing I did was call a meeting of all supervisory 
personnel and explain the incident to them. Then I showed them 
what a customer is really worth. Once I got these people to see 
that a customer is not to be valued on a single sale but rather on 
an annual basis, customer service defmitely improved." 
The point made by the retailing executive applies to any 
kind of business. It's repeat business that makes the profit. 
Often, there's no profit at all on the first several sales. Look at 
the potential expenditures of the customers, not just what they 
buy today. 
Putting a big value on customers is what converts them into 
big, regular patrons. Attaching little value to customers sends 
them elsewhere. A student related this pertinent incident to me, 
explaining why he'll never again eat in a certain cafeteria. 
"For lunch one day," the student began, "I decided to try 
a new cafeteria that had just opened a couple of weeks before. 
Nickels and dimes are pretty important to me right nmv, so I 
watch what I buy pretty closely. Walking past the meat section I 
saw some turkey and dressing that looked pretty good, and it was 
plainly marked 39 cents. 
"When I got to 'the cash register, the checker looked at 
my tray and said, '1.09.' I politely asked her to check it again 
because my tally was 99 cents. After giving me a mean glare, she 
recounted. The difference turned out to be the turkey. She had 
'charged me 49 celits instead of 39 cents. Then I called her atten­
tion to the sign, which read 39 cents. 
"This really set her off! 'I don't care what that sign says. 
It's supposed to be 49 cents. See. Here's my price listEor today. 
Somebody back there made a mistake. You'll have to pay the 49 
cents.' 

--- Page 92 ---
86 HOWTOTHINK BIG 
"Then I tried to explain to her· the only reason I selected the 
turkey was because it was 39 cents. If it had been marked 49 cents 
r d have taken something else. 
"To this, her answer was 'You'll just have to pay the 49 
cents.' I did, because I didn't want to stand there and create a 
scene. But I decided on the spot that r d never eat there again. I 
spend about $250 a year for lunches, and you can be sure they'll 
not get one penny of it." 
There's an example of the little view. The checker saw one 
thin dime, not the potential $250. 
3. The case of the blind milkman. It's surprising how people some­
times are blind to potential. A few years ago a young milkman 
came to our door to solicit our dairy business. I explained to him 
that we already had milk delivery service and we were quite 
satisfied. Then I suggested that he stop next door and talk to the 
lady there. 
To this he replied, "I've already talked to the lady next door, 
but they use only one quart of milk every two days, and that's 
not enough to make it worthwhile for me to stop." 
"That may be," I said, "but when you talked to our neigh­
bOI; did you not observe that the demand for milk in that house­
hold will increase considerably in a month or so? There will be a 
new addition over there that will consume lots of milk." 
The young man looked for a moment like he had been 
struck, and then he said, "How blind can a guy be?" 
Today that same one-quart-every-two-days family buys 
seven quarts every two days from a millunan who had some fore­
sight. That first youngster, a boy, now has two brothers and one 
sister. And I'm told there'll be another young one soon. 

--- Page 93 ---
HOWTOTHINK BIG B7 
How blind can we be? See what can be, not just what is. 
The schoolteacher who thinks of Jimmy only as he is-an 
ill-mannered, backward, uncouth brat---certainly will not aid 
Jimmy's development. But the teacher who sees Jimmy not as he 
is now but as he can be, she'll get results. 
Most folks driving through skid row see only broken-down 
stumblebums hopelessly lost to the bottle. A few devoted people 
see something else in the skid row-itej they see a reconstructed 
citizen. Arid because they see this, they succeed in many cases in 
doing an excellent rehabilitation job. 
4. What determines how much you're worth? After a training ses­
sion a few weeks ago, a young man came to see me and asked if 
he could talk with me for a few minutes. I knew that this young 
fellow, now about twenty-six; had been a very underprivileged 
child. On top of this, he had experienced a mountain of misfor­
tune in his early adult years. I also knew that he was making a 
real effort to prepare himself for a solid future. 
Over coffee, we quickly worked out his technical problem, 
and our discussion turned to how people who have few physical 
possessions should look toward the future. His comments pro­
vide a straightforward, sound answer. 
"I've got less than $200 in the .bank. My job as a rate clerk 
doesn't pay much, and it doesn't carry much responsibility. My car 
is four years old, and my wife and I live in a cramped second-floor 
apartment. 
"But, Professor," he continued, "I'm determined not to let 
what I haven't got stop me.:' 
That was an intriguing statement, so I urged him to 
explain. 

--- Page 94 ---
88. HOWTOTHINK BIG 
"It's this way," he went on, 'Tve been analyzing people a lot 
lately, and I've noticed this. People who don't have much look at 
themselves as they are now. That's all they see. They don't see a 
future, they just see a miserable present. 
"My neighbor is a good example. He's continually com­
plaining about having a low-pay job, the plumbing that's always 
getting fouled up, the lucky breaks somebody else just got, the 
doctor bills that are piling up. He reminds himself so often that 
he's poor that now he just assumes that he's always going to be 
poor. He acts as if he were sentenced to living in that broken­
down apartment all the rest of his life." 
My friend was really speaking from the heart, and after 
a moment's pause he added, "If I looked at myself strictly as 
I am-old car, low income, cheap apartment, and'hamburger 
diet-I couldn't help but be discouraged. I'd see a nobody and I'd 
be a nobody for the rest of my life. 
''I've made up my mind to look at myself as the person I'm 
going to be in a few short years. I see myself not as a rate clerk 
but as an executive. I don't see a crummy apartment, I see a fine 
new suburban home. Apd when I look at myself that way, I feel 
bigger and think bigger. And I've got plenty of personal experi­
ences to prove it's paying off." 
Isn't that a splendid plan for adding value to oneself? This 
young fellow is on the expressway to really fine living. He's 
mastered this basic success principle: It isn't what one has that's 
important. Rather, it's how much one is planning to get that 
counts. 
The price tag the world puts on us is just about identical to 
the one we put on ourselves. 

--- Page 95 ---
HOW TO THIlIK BIG 89 
Here is how you can develop your power to see what can 
be, not just what is. I call these the "practice adding value" exer­
cises. 
1. Practice adding value to things. Remember the real estate 
example. Ask yourself, "What can I do to 'add value' to 
this room or this house or this business?" Look for ideas to 
make things worth more. A thing-whether it be a vacant 
lot, a house, or a business-has value in proportion to the 
ideas for using it. 
2. Practice adding value to people. As you move higher and 
higher in t~e world of success, more and more of your 
job becomes "people development." Ask, "What can I do 
to 'add value' to my subordinates? What can I do to help 
them to become more effective?" Remember, to bring out 
the best in a person, you must first visualize his best. 
3. Practice adding value to yourself. Conduct a daily interview 
with yourself. Ask, "What can I do to make myself more 
valuable today?" Visualize yourself not as you are but as 
you can be. Then specific ways for attaining your potential 
value will suggest themselves. Just try and see. 
A retired owner-manager of a medium-size printing company 
(sixty employees) explained to me how his successor was picked. 
"Five years ago," my friend began, "I needed an accountant 
to head up our accounting and office routine. The fellow' I hired 
was named Harry and was only twenty-six. He kuew nothing 

--- Page 96 ---
90 HOWTO THINK BIG 
about the printing business, but his record showed he was a good 
accountant. Yet a year and a half ago, when] retired, we made 
him president and general manager of the company. 
"Looking back on it, Harry had one trait that put him out 
in front of everyone else. Harry was sincerely and actively inter­
ested in the whole company, not just writing checks and keeping 
records. Whenever he saw how he could help other employ'ees, 
he jumped right in. 
"The first year Harry was with me: we lost a few men. 
Harry came to me with a fringe benefit program which he prom­
ised wO]lld cut down turnover at low cost. And it worked. 
"Harry did many other things, too, which helped the whole 
company, not just this department. He made a detailed cost study 
of our production department and showed me how a $30,000 
investment in new machinery would payoff. Once we experi­
enced a pretty bad sales slump. Harry went to our sales manager 
and said, in effect, '] don't know much about the sales end of the 
business, but let me try to help,' And he did. Harry came up with 
several good ideas which helped us sell more jobs. 
"When a new employee joined us, Harry was right there to 
help the fellow get comfortable. Harry took a real interest in the 
entire operation. 
"When] retired, Harry was the only logical person to take 
over. 
"But don't misunderstand," 'my ftiend continued, "Harry 
didn't try to put himself over on me. He wasn't a mere meddler. 
He wasn't aggressive in a negative way. He didn't stab people in 
the back, and he didn't go around giving orders: He just went 
around helping. Harry simply acted as if everything in the com' 
pany affected him, He made company business his business," 

--- Page 97 ---
HOWTOTHIfIK BIG 91 
We can all learn a lesson from Harry. The 'Tm doing my 
job and that's enough" attitude is small, negative thinking. Big 
thinkers see themselves as members of a team effort, as winning 
or losing with the team, not by themselves. They help in every 
way they can, even when there is no direct and immediate com­
pensation or other reward. The fellow who shrugs off a problem 
outside his own department with the comment "Well, that's no 
concern of mine, let them worry with it" hasn't got the attitude 
it takes for top leadership. 
Practice this. Practice being a big thinker. See the compa-
\ ny's interest as identical with your own. Probably only a very 
few persons working in large companies have a sincere, unselfish 
interest in their company. But after all, only a relatively few per­
sons qualifY as big thinkers. And these few are the ones eventu­
ally rewarded with the most responsible, best-paying jobs. 
Many, m~ny potentially powerful people let petty, small, 
insignificant things block their way to achievement. Let's look at 
four examples. 
1. WHAT DOES IT TAKE 10 MAKE A 
GOOD SPEECH? 
Just about everyone wishes he had the "ability" to do a frrst-class 
job of speaking in public. But most people don't get their wish. 
Most folks are lousy public speakers. 
Why? The reason is simple: most people concentrate on the 
small, trivial things of speaking at the expense of the big, impor­
tant things. In preparing to give a talk, most people give them­
selves a host of mental instructions, like 'Tve got to remember to 
stand straight," "Don't move around and don't use your hands," 
"Don't let the audience see you use your notes," "Remember, 

--- Page 98 ---
92 HOW TO THINK BIG 
don't make mistakes in grammar, especially don't say 'for he and 
I,' say 'for him and me,''' "Be sure your tie is straight," "Speak 
loud, but not too loud," and so on and on. 
Now, what happens when the speaker gets up to speak?, 
He's scared because he's given himself a terrific list of things not 
to do. He gets confused in his talk and finds himself silently ask­
ing, "Have I made, a mistake?" He is, in brief, a flop. He's a flop 
because he concentrated on the petty, trivial, relatively unimport­
ant qualities of a good speaker and failed to concentrate on the 
big things that make a good speaker: knowledge of what he's going 
to talk about and an intense desire to tell it to other people. 
The real test of a speaker is not did he stand straight or did 
he make any mistakes in grammar, but rather did the audience 
get the points he wanted to put across. Most of our top speakers 
have petty defects; some of them even have unpleasant voices. 
Some of the most sought-after speakers in America would flunk 
a speech course taught by the old negative, "don't do this and 
don't do that," method. 
Yet all these successful public speakers have one thing in 
common: They have something to say and they feel a bunting desire 
for other people to hear it. 
Don't let concern with trivia keep you from speaking suc­
cessfully in public. 
-2. WHAT CAUSES QUARRELS? 
Ever stop to ask yourself just what causes quarrels? At least 99 
percent of the time, quarrels start over petty, unimportant matters 
like this: John comes home a little tired, a little on edge. Dinner 
doesn't exactly please hini, so he turns up his nose and complains. 
Joan's day wasn't perfect either, so she rallies to her own defense 

--- Page 99 ---
HOWTOTHINK BIG 93 
with "Well, what do you expect on my food budget?" or "Maybe 
I could cook better if I had a new stove like everybody else." This 
insults John's pride, so he attacks with "Now, Joan, it's not lack of 
money; it's simply that you don't know how to manage." 
And away they go! Before a truce is fmally declared, all sorts 
of accusations are made by each party. In-laws, sex, money, pre­
marital and postmarital promises, and other issues will be intro­
duced. Both parties leave the battle nervous, tense. Nothing has 
been settled, and both parties have new ammunition to make the 
next quarrel more vicious. Little things, petty thinking, causes 
arguments. So, to eliminate quarrels, eliminate petty thinking. 
Here's a technique that works: before complaining or 
accusing or reprimanding someone or launching a counterat­
tack in self-defense, ask yourself, "Is it really important?" In most 
cases, it isn't and you avoid conflict. 
Ask yourself, "Is it really important if he (or she) is messy 
with cigarettes or forgets to put the cap on the toothpaste or is 
late coming home?" 
"Is it really important if he ( or she) squandered a little 
money or invited some people in I don't like?" 
When you feel like taking negative action, ask yourself, 
"Is it really important?" That question works magic in building 
a finer home situation. It works at the office, ·too. It works in 
home-going traffic when another driver cuts in ahead of you. It 
works in any situation in life that is apt to produce quarrels. 
3. JOHN GOT THE SMALLEST OFFICE AND FIZZLED OUT 
Several years ago, I observed small thinking about an office 
assignment destroy a young fellow's chances for a profitable 
career in advertising. 

--- Page 100 ---
94 HOWTOTHIlIK BIG 
Four young executives, all on the same status level, were 
moved into new offices. Three of the offices were identical in 
size and decoration. The fourth was smaller and less elabo-
rate. 
J. M. was assigned the fourth office. This turned Qut to be a· 
real blow to his pride. Immediately he felt discriminated against. 
Negative thinking, resentment, bitterness, jealousy built up. J. M. 
began to feel inadequate. The result was that J. M. grew hostile 
toward his fellO\v executives. Rather than cooperate, he did his 
best to undermine their efforts. Things got worse. Three months 
later J. M. slipped so badly that management had no choice but 
to issue him a pink slip. 
Small thinking over a very small matter stopped J. M. In his 
haste to feel he was discriminated against, J. M. failed to observe 
that the company was expanding rapidly and office space was 
at a premium. He didn't stop to consider the possibility that the 
executive who made the office assignments didn't even know 
which one was the smallest! No one in the organization, except 
J. M., regarded his office as an index of his value. 
Small thinking about unimportant things like seeing your 
name last on the department route sheet or getting the fourth 
carbon of an office memo can hurt you. Think big, and none of 
these little things can hold you back. 
4. EVEN STUTTERING IS A DETAIL 
A sales executive told me how even stuttering is a mere detail in 
salesmanship if the fellow has the really important qualities. 
"I have a friend, also a sales executive, who loves to play prac­
tical jokes, though sometimes these jokes aren't jokes at all. A few 
months ago a young fellow called on my practical-joking friend 

--- Page 101 ---
HOWTOTHINK BIG 95 
and asked for a sales job. The fellow had a terrible stntter, though, 
and my friend decided right here was a chance to playa joke on 
me. So the friend told the stammering applicant that he wasn't in 
the market for a salesman right now but one of his friends (me) 
had ~ spot to fill. Then he phoned me, and, boy, did he give this 
fellow a buildup. Not suspecring anything, 1 said, 'Send him right 
over!' 
"Thirty minutes later, in he walked. The young fellow 
hadn't said three words before 1 knew why my friend was so 
eager to send him over. 'I-H'mJ-J-Jack R.: he said, 'Mr. X sent me 
over t-t-to talk t-t-to you about a j-j-job.' Almost every word was 
a struggle. 1 thought to myself, 'This guy couldn't sell a dollar bill 
for 90 cents on Wall Street: 1 was sore at my friend, bnt 1 really 
felt sorry for this fellow, so 1 thought the least 1 could do was to' 
ask him some polite questions while 1 thought up a good excuse 
as to why 1 couldn't use him. 
'1\s we talked on, however, 1 discovered this fellow was no 
stnpe. He was intelligent. He handled himself very nicely, but 1 
just couldn't overlook the fact that he stnttered. Finally, 1 decided 
[' d wind up the interview by asking one last question. 'What 
makes you think you can sell?' 
"'Well: he said, 'I learn £-£-fast, 1-1-1 like people, 1-1-1 think 
you've got a good company, and 1-1-1 want t+to make m-m-money, 
Now, 1-1-1 do have a speech im-im-pairment, b-b-but that doesn't 
b-b-bother me, so why should it b-b-bother anybody else?' 
"His' answer showed me he had all the really important 
qualifications for a salesman. I decided right then to give him a 
chance. And you know, he's working out very well." 
Even a speech impairment in a talker's profession is a trivi­
ality if the person has the big qualities. 

--- Page 102 ---
96 HOW TO THINK BIG 
Practice these three procedures to help yourself think 
about trivialities: 
1. Keep your eyes focused on the big objective. Many times 
we're like the salesman who, failing to make the sale, 
reports to his manager, "Yes, but I sure convinced the cus­
tomer he was wrong." In selling, the big objective is win­
ning sales, not arguments. 
In marriage the big objective is peace, happiness, tran­
quillity-not winning quarrels or saying "I could have told 
you so," 
In working with employees, the big objective is develop­
ing their full potential;not making issues out of their minor 
errors. 
In living with neighbors, the big objective is mutual 
respect and friendship-not seeing if you can have their dog 
impounded because once in a while it barks at night. 
Paraphrasing some military lingo, it is much better to 
lose a battle and win the war than to win a battle and lose 
the war. 
Resolve to keep your eyes on the big ball. 
2. Ask "Is it really important?" Before becoming negatively , 
excited, just ask yourself, "Is it important enough for me to 
get all worked up about?" There is no better way to avoid 
frustration over petty matters than to use this medicine. 
At least 90 percent of quarrels and feuds would never take 
. place if we just faced troublesome situations with "Is this 
really important?" 

--- Page 103 ---
HOW TO THINK BI6 97 
3. Don't fall into the triviality trap. In milking speeches, solv­
ing problems, counseling employees, think of those things 
that really matter, things that make the difference. Don't 
become submerged under surface issues. Concentrate on 
important things. 
TAKE THIS TEST TO MEASURE THE SIZE OF 
YOUR THINKING 
In the left-hand column below are listed several common situ­
ations. In the middle and right-hand columns are comparisons 
of how petty thinkers and big thinkers see the same situation. 
Check yourself Then decide, which will get me where I want to 
go) Petty thinking or big thinking? 
The same situation handled in two entirely different ways. 
The choice is yours. 
SITUATION 
Expense accounts 
Conversation THE PETTY 
THINKER'S 
APPROACH 
1. Figures out 
ways to increase 
income through 
chiseling on 
expense accounts. 
2. Talks about the 
negative qualities 
of his fi'iends, 
the economYI 
his company, the 
competition. THE BIG 
THINI{ER'S 
APPROACH 
1. Figures out 
ways to increase 
income by selling 
more merchan­
dise. 
2. Talks about the 
positive qualities 
of his friends, 
his company, the 
competition. 

--- Page 104 ---
98 HOWTO THINK BIG 
SITUATION THE PETTY 
THINKER'S 
APPROACH --"" ~-- "~~-----""" 
Progress 
Future 
Work 
Competition 
Budget problems 
Goals 
Goals vision 
Security 
Companionship 
Mistakes 3. Believes in 
retrenchment or 
at best the status 
quo. 
4. Views the future 
as limited. 
5. Looks for ways 
to avoid work. 
6. Competes with 
the average.-
7. Figures out ways 
to save money by 
~utting down on 
necessary items, 
8. Sets goals Imv. 
9. Sees only the 
short run. 
10. Is preoccupied 
with security 
problems. 
II. Surrounds rum­
self with petty 
thinkers. 
12. Magnifies minor 
errors. Turns 
them into big 
issues. THE BIG 
THINKER'S 
APPROACH 
3. Believes in 
expansion. 
4. Sees the future as 
very promising. 
5. Looks for more 
ways and trungs 
to do. especially 
helping others. 
6. Competes with 
the best. 
7. Figures out 
ways to increase 
income and buy 
more of the 
necessary items. 
8. Sets goals rugh. 
9. Is preoccupied 
with the long run. 
10. Regards security 
as a natural com~ 
parnon of success, 
II. Surrounds rum­
self with persons 
with large, pro­
gressive ideas. 
12. Ignores errors 
of little conse­
quence. 

--- Page 105 ---
HOY/TO THINK BIG 99 
REMEMBER. IT PAYS IN EVERY WAY 
TOTHINK BIG! 
1. Don't sell yourself short. Conquer the crime of self-depre­
cation. Concentrate on your assets. You're better than you 
think you are. 
2. Use the big thinker's vocabulary. Use big. bright, cheerful 
words. Use words that promise victory; hope, happiness, . 
pleasure; avoid words that create unpleasant images of fail­
ure, defeat, grief. 
3. Stretch your vision: See what can be, not just what is. 
Practice adding value to things, to people, and to yourself. 
4. Get the big view of your job. Think, really think your pres­
ent job is important. That next promotion depends mostly 
on how you think toward your present job. 
5. Think above trivial things. Focus your attention on big 
objectives. Before getting involved in a petty matter, ask 
yourself, "Is it really important?" 
Grow big by thinking big! 

--- Page 106 ---
5 
HOW TO TH INK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 
FII!ST, LET'S CLEAn UP a common fallacy about the meaning of 
creative thinking. For some illogical reason, science, engineering, 
art, and writing got tabbed as about the only truly creative pur­
suits. Most people associate creative thinking with things like the 
discovery of electricity or polio vaccine, or the writing of a novel 
or the development of color television. 
Certainly; accomplishments like these are evidence of cre­
ative thinking. Each forward step made in the conquest of space 
is the result of creative thinking, lots of it. But creative thinking 
is not reserved for certain occupations, nor is it restricted to 
superintelligent people. 
Well, then, what is creative thinking? 
A low-income family devises a plan to send their son to a 
leading university. That's creative thinking. 
A family turns the street's most undesirable lot into the 
neighborhood beauty spot. That's creative thinking. 
A minister develops a plan that doubles his Sunday evening 
attendance. That's creative thinking. 
Figuring out ways to simplifY record keeping, selling the 
"impossible" customer, keeping the children occupied construc-

--- Page 107 ---
HOWTO THINK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 101 
tively, making employees really like their work, or preventing a 
"certain" quarrel-all of these are examples of practical, every­
day creative thinking. 
Creative thinking is simply fmding new, improved ways to 
do anything. The rewards of all types of success-success in the 
home, at work, in the community-hinge on fmding ways to 
do things better. Now let's see what we can do to develop and 
strengthen our creative thinking ability, 
Step one: Believe it can be done. Here is a basic truth: To do any­
thing, we must first believe it can be done. Believing something 
can be done sets the mind in motion to find a way to do it. 
To illustrate this point of creative thinking in training ses­
sions, I often use this example: I ask the group, "How many of 
you feel it is possible to eliminate jails within the next thirty 
. years?" 
Invariably the group looks bewildered, not quite sure they 
heard right and thinking they are listening to a real fuzzy-wuzzy. 
So after a pause I repeat, "How many of you feel it is possible to 
eliminate jails within the next thirty years?" 
Once they're sure I'm not joking, someone always blasts 
me with something like "You mean to say you want to turn all ' 
those murderers, thieves, and rapists loose? Don't you realize 
what this would mean? Why, none of us would be safe. We have 
to have jails." 
Then the others cut loose: 
'M order would break down if we didn't have jails." 
"Some people are born criminals." 
"If anything, we need more jails." 
"Did you read in this morning's paper about that murder?" 

--- Page 108 ---
102 HOWTO THINK AlID DREAM CREATIVElY 
And the group goes on, telling me ail sorts of good reasons 
why we must have jails. One fellow even suggested we've got to 
have jails so the police and prison guards can have jobs. 
After about ten minutes of letting the group "prove" why 
we can't eliminate the need for jails, I say to them, "Now let me 
mention here that this question of eliminating jails is used to 
make a point. 
"Each of you has come up with reasons why we can't elimi­
nate the need for jails. Will you do me a favor? Will you try extra 
hard for a few minutes to believe we can eliminate jails?" 
Joining in the spirit of the experiment, the group says, in 
effect, "Oh, well, but just for kicks." Then I ask, "Now, assuming 
we can elim~ate jails, how could we begin?" 
Suggestions come slowly at fIrst. Someone hesitantly says 
something like, "Well, you might cut down crime if you estab­
lished more youth centers." 
Before long, the group, which ten minutes ago was solidly 
against the idea, now begins to work up real enthusiasm. 
"Work to eliminate poverty. Most crime stems from the low 
income levels." 
"Conduct research to spot potential criminals before they 
commit a crime." 
"Develop surgical procedures to cure some kinds of crimi-
nals." 
"Educate law enforcement personnel in positive methods 
of reform." 
These are just samples of the seventy-eight specilic ideas I've 
tabulated that could help accomplish the goal of eiiminatingjails. 
WHEN YOU BELIEVE, YOUR MIND FINDS WAYS TO DO. 
This experiment has just one point: When you believe some-

--- Page 109 ---
HOWTO THINK ANO DREAM CREATIVELY 103 
thing is impossible, your mind goes to work for you to prove why. But 
whe/! you believe, really believe, something cau be doue, your miud goes 
to work for you and helps you fiud the ways to do it. 
Believing something can be done paves the way for creative 
solutions. Believing something can't be done is destructive think­
ing. This point applies to all situations, Iitde and big. The political 
leaders who do not genuinely believe permanent world peace 
can be established will fail because their minds are closed to 
creative ways to bring about peace. The economists who believe 
business depressions are inevitable will not develop creative ways 
to beat the business cycle. 
In a similar fashion, you can fmd ways to like a person if 
you believe you can. 
You cau discover solutions to personal problems if you 
believe you can. 
You cau fmd a way to purchase that new, larger home if you 
believe you can. 
Belief releases creative powers. Disbelief puts the brakes 
on. 
Believe, and you'll start thinking---<:onstructively. 
Your mind will creaie.a way if you lei il. A little over two years ago 
a young man asked me to help him find a job with more future. 
He was employed as a clerk in the credit department of a mail-. 
order company and felt that he was getting nowhere. We talked 
about his past record and what he wanted to do. After knowing 
something about him, I said, "I admire you very much for want­
ing to move up the ladder to a better job and more responsibil­
ity. But getting a start in the kind of job you want requires a col­
lege degree these days. I notice you've finished three semesters. 

--- Page 110 ---
104 HOWTOTHINKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 
May I suggest you finish college. Going summers, you can do it 
in two years. Then I'm sure you can land the job you want, with 
the company you want to work for." 
"I realize," he answered, "that a college eduqtion would 
help. But it's impossible for me to go back to school." 
"Impossible? Why?" I asked. 
"Well, for one thing," he began, 'Tm twenty-four. On top 
of that, my wife and I are expecting our second child In a couple 
of months. We barely get by now on what I make. I wouldn't 
have time to study since I'd have to keep my job. It's just impos­
sible, that's all." 
This young man really had himself convinced that fmishing 
college was impossible. 
Then I said to him, "If you believe it is impossible to fmish 
sebool, then it is. But by the same token, if you'll just believe it is 
possible to return to the university, a solution will come. 
"Now, here's what I would like you to do. Make up your 
mind you are going to go back to school. Let that one thought 
dominate your thinking. Then think, really think, about how you 
can do it' and still support your family. Come back in a couple of 
weeks and let me know what ideas you've come up with." 
My young friend returned two weeks later. 
"I thought a lot about what you said," he began. 'Tve 
decided I must go back to school. I haven't figured out all the 
angles yet, but !'II fmd a solution." 
And he did. 
He managed to get a scholarship ptovided by a trade asso­
ciation, which paid his tuition, books, and incidentals. He rear-. 
ranged his work schedule so he could attend classes. His enthu­
siasm and the promise of a better life won him his wife's full 

--- Page 111 ---
HOWTOTHIHKANO OREAM CREATIVELY 105 
support. Together they creatively found ways to budget money 
and time more effectively. 
Last month he received his degree one day and went to 
work the next as a management trainee for a large corporation. 
Where there's a will, there is a way. 
Believe it can be done. That's basic to creative thinking. Here are 
suggestions to help you develop creative power through belief: 
1. Eliminate the word impossible from your thinking and 
speaking vocabularies. Impossible is a failure word. The 
thought "It's impossible': sets off a chain reaction of other 
thoughts to prove you're right. 
2. 'Think of something special you've been wanting to do 
but felt,You couldn't. Now make a list of reasons why you 
can do it. Many of us whip and defeat our desires simply 
because we concentrate on why we can't when the only 
thing worthy of our mental concentration is why we can. 
Recently I read a newspaper item that said there are too 
many counties in most states. The article pointed out that most 
county boundaries were established decades before the first auto­
mobile was built and while the horse and buggy was the chief 
mode of travel. But today, with fast automobiles and good roads, 
there is no reason why three or four counties could not be com­
bined. This would cut down greatly on duplicated services so that 
taxpayers would actually get better service for less money. 
The writer of this article said he thought he had stumbled 
across a really live idea, so he interviewed thirty people at ran-

--- Page 112 ---
106 HOWTOTHINKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 
dom to get their reactions. The result: not one person thought 
the idea had merit, even though it would provide them with bet­
ter local government at less cost. 
That's an example of traditional thinking. The traditional 
thinker's mind is paralyzed. He reasons, "It's been this way for 
a hundred years. Therefore, it must be good and must stay this 
way. Why risk a change?" 
'1\verage" people have always resented progress. Many 
voiced a protest toward the automobile on the grounds that 
nature meant for us to walk or use horses. The airplane seemed 
drastic to many. Man had no "right" to enter the province 
"reserved" for birds. A lot of "status-quo-ers" still insist that man 
has no business in space. 
One top missile expert recently gave an answer to this kind 
of thinking. "Man belongs," says Dr. von Braun, "where man 
wants to go." 
Around 1900 a sales executive discovered a "scientific" 
principle of sales management. It received a lot of publicity and 
even found its way into textbooks. The principle was this: There 
is one best way to sell a product. Find the best way. Then never 
deviate from it. 
Fortunately for this man's company, new leadership came 
in in time to save the organization from fmancial ruin. 
Contrast that experience with the philosophy of Crawford 
H. Greenewalt, president of one of the nation's largest business 
organizations! E. l. du Pont de Nemours. In a talk at Columbia 
University, Mr. Greenewalt said, " ... there are many ways in 
which a good job can be done-as many ways, in fact, as there 
are men to whom the task is given." 
In truth, there is no one best way to do anything. There 

--- Page 113 ---
HOW TO THINK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 107 
is no one best way to decorate an apartment, landscape a lawn, 
make a sale, rear a child, or cook a steak. There are as many best 
ways as there are creative minds. 
Nothing grows 10 ice. If we let tradition freeze our minds, 
new ideas can't sprout. Make this test sometime soon. Propose 
one of the ideas below to someone and then watch his behavior. 
1. The postal system, long a government monopoly, should be 
turned oveno private enterprise. 
2. Presidential elections should be held every two or six years 
Iostead of four. 
3. Regular hours for retail stores should be 1 P.M. to 8 P.M., 
instead of 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. 
4. The retirement age should be raised to seventy, 
Whether these ideas are sound or practical is not the 
polot. What is significant is how a person handles propositions 
like these. If he laughs at the idea and doesn't give it a second 
thought (and probably 95 percent· will laugh at it) chances are he 
suffers from tradition paralysis. But the one 10 twenty who says, 
"That's an Ioteresting idea; tell me more about it," has a mlod 
that's turned to creativity. 
Traditional thloking is personal enemy number one for the 
person who is interested 10 a creative personal success program. 
Traditional thinking freezes your mind, blocks your progress, 
and prevents you from developing creative power. Here are three 
ways to fight it: 

--- Page 114 ---
108 HOWTOTHINKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 
1. Become receptive to ideas. Welcome new ideas. Destroy 
these thought repellents: "Won't work," "Can't be done," 
"It's useless," and "It's stupid." 
A very successful friend of mine who holds a major 
position with an insurance company said to me, "I don't 
pretend to be the smartest guy in the business. But I think 
I am the best sponge in the. insurance industry, I make it a 
point to soak up all the good ideas I can." 
2. Be an experimental person. Break up fIxed routines. Expose 
yourself to new restaurants, new books, new theaters, new 
friends; take a different route to work someday, take a dif­
ferent vacation this year, do something new and different 
this weekend. 
If your work is in distribution, develop an interest in 
production, accounting, fmance, and the other elements of 
business. This gives you breadth and prepares you for larger 
responsibilities. 
3. Be progressive, not regressive. Not "That's the way we did 
it where I used to work, so we ought to do it that way here" 
but "How can we do it better than we did it where I used 
to work?" Not backward, regressive thinking but forward, 
progressive thinking. Because you got up at 5:30 A.M. to 
deliver papers or milk the cows when you were a YQungster 
doesn't necessarily mean it's a good idea for you to require. 
your children to do the same. 

--- Page 115 ---
HOW TO THINK AND OREAM CREATIVELY 109 
Imagine what would happen to the Ford Motor Company if its 
management allowed itself to think, "This year we've built the 
ultimate in automobiles. Further improvement is impossible. 
Therefore, all experimental engineering and designing activities 
are hereby permanently terminated." Even the mammoth Ford 
Motor Company would shrivel fast with this attitude. 
Successful people, like successful businesses, live with these 
questions: "How can I improve the quality of my performance? 
How can I do better?" 
Absolute perfection in all human undertakings from 
building missiles to rearing children is unattainable. This means 
there is endless room for improvement. Successful people know 
this, and they are always searching for a better way. (Note: The 
successful person doesn't ask, "Can I do it better?" He knolVs he 
can. So he phrases the question: "How can I do it better?") 
A few months ago, a former student of mine, in business 
for just four years, opened her fourth hardware store. This was 
quite a feat, considering the young lady's small initial capital 
investment of only $3,500, strong competition from other stores, 
and the relatively short time she had been in business. 
I visited her new store shortly afrer it opened to congratu­
late her on the fine progress she had made. 
In an indirect way I asked her how she was able to make a 
success of three stores and open a fourth one when most mer­
chants had to struggle to make a success of just one store. 
"Naturally;" she answered, "I worked hard, but just get­
ting up early and working late isn't responsible for the four 
stores. Most people in my business work hard. The main thing 
I attribute my success to is my self-styled 'weekly improvement 
program.' " 

--- Page 116 ---
110 HOWTO THINK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 
"A weekly improvement program? Sounds impressive. How 
does it work?" I asked. 
"Well, it really isn't anything elaborate," she continued, "it's 
just a plan to help me do a better job as each week rolls around. 
"To keep my forward thinking on the track, I've divided my 
job into four elements: customers, employees, merchandise, and 
promotion. All during the week I make notes and jot down ideas 
as to how I can improve my business. 
"Then, every Monday evening, I set aside four hours to 
review the ideas I've jotted down and figure Ollt how to put the 
solid ones to use in the business. 
"In this four-hour period I force myself to take a hard look 
at my operation. I don't simply wish more customers would shop 
in my store. Instead I ask myself, 'What can I do to 'attract more 
customers?' 'How can I develop regular, loyal customers?''' 
She went on describing numerous little innovations that 
made her first three stores so successful: things like the way she 
arranged the merchandise within her stores, her suggestion-sell­
ing technique that sold two out of three customers merchandise 
they had not planned to buy when they entered her stores, the 
credit plan she devised when many of her customers were out of 
work because of a strike, the contest she developed that boosted 
sales during a slack season. 
"I ask myself, 'What can I do to improve my merchandise 
offerings?' and I get ideas. Let me cite just one case. Four weeks 
ago, it occurred to me that I should do something to get more 
youngsters into the store. I reasoned, if I had something here to 
draw the kids to the store, I'd also draw more of the parents. I 
kept thinking about it, and then this idea came: Put in a line of 
small carded toys for chlldren in the four-to-eight age bracket, It's 

--- Page 117 ---
HOWTOTHINKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 111 
working! The toys take little space and I make a nice profit on 
them. But, most important, the toys have increased store traffic. 
"Believe me," she went on, "my weekly improvement plan 
works. Just by conscientiously asking myself, 'How can I do a 
better job?' I fmd the answers. It's a rare Monday night that I 
don't come up with some plan or technique that makes that 
profit and loss statement look better. 
'i\nd I've learned something else too about successful mer­
chandising, something that I think every person going into busi­
ness for himself should knOw." 
"What's that?" I asked. 
'Just this: It isn't so much what you know when you start 
that matters. It's what you learn and put to use after you open 
your doors that counts most." 
Big success calls for persons who continually set higher 
standards for themselves and others, persons who are searching 
for ways to increase efficiency, to get more output at lower cost, 
do more with less effort. Top success is reserved for the I-can-do­
it-better kind of person. 
General Electric uses the slogan "Progress is our most 
important product." 
Why not make progress your most important product) 
The I-can-do-better philosophy works magic. When you ask 
yourself, "How can I do better?" your creative power is switched 
on and ways for doing things better suggest themselves. 
Here is a daily exercise that will help you discover and 
develop the power of the I-can-do-better attitude. 
Each day before you begin work, devote ten minutes to 
thinking "How can I do a better job today?" Ask, "What can 
I do today to encourage my employees?" "What special favor 

--- Page 118 ---
112 HOW TO THItIK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 
can I do for my customers)" "How can I increase my personal 
efficiency?" 
This exercise is simple. But it works. Try it, and you'll fmd 
unlimited creative ways to win greater success. 
Just about every time my wife and I would get together with a 
certain couple, the conversation would turn to "working wives." 
Mrs. S. had worked several years before her marriage, and she 
had genuinely liked it. 
"But now," she'd say, "I've got two youngsters in school, 
a home to manage, and meals to prepare. I simply haven't got 
time." 
Then, one Sunday evening, Mr. and Mrs. S. and their chil­
dren were in an automobile accident. Mrs. S. and the youngsters 
escaped serious injury, but Mr. S. received a back injury that left 
him permanently disabled. Now Mrs. S. had no choice but to go 
to work. 
When we saw her several months after the accident, we 
were amazed to find how well she had adjusted to her new 
responsibilities. 
"You know," she said, "six. months ago I never dreamed I 
could possibly manage the house and work full-time. But after 
the accident, I just made up my mind that I had to find the time. 
Believe me, my efficiency has gone up 100 percent. I discovered 
a lot of things I was doing didn't need to be done at all. Then I 
discovered that the children could and wanted to help. I found 
dozens of ways to conserve time-fewer trips to the store, less 
TV; less telephoning, less of those time killers." 
This experience teaches us a lesson: Capacity is a state of 
mind. How much we can do depends on how much we think we 

--- Page 119 ---
HOWTO THINK ArID DREAM CREATIVELY 113 
can do. When you really believe you can do more, your mind 
thinks creatively and shows you the way. 
A young bank executive related this personal experience 
about "work capacity." 
"One of the other executives in our bank left us with very 
short notice. This put our department on the spot. The fellow 
leaving had filled an 'important job, and his work couldn't be 
postponed or left undone. 
"The day after he left, the vice president in charge of my 
department called me ,in, He explained to me that he had already 
talked individually to the two others in my group, asking them 
if they could divide the work of the man who had just left until 
a replacement could be found. 'Neither of them flatly refused: 
said the vice president, 'but each stated that he is up to his neck 
now with his own pressing work. I'm wondering if you could 
handle some of the overload temporarily?' 
"Throughout my working career, I've learned that it never 
pays to turn down what looks like an opportunity. So I agreed 
\ and promised to do my very best to handle all the vacated job 
as well as keep up with my own work. The vice president was 
pleased at this. 
, "I walked out of his office knowing I had taken on a big 
job. I was just as busy as the two others in my department who 
had wiggled out of this extra duty. But I was determined to fmd 
a way to handle both jobs. I fInished up my work that afternoon, 
'and when the offices were closed, I sat down to figure out how 
I could increase my personal efficiency. I got a pencil and started 
writingdown every idea I could think of. 
'i\nd you knmv, I came up with some good ones: like work­
ing out an arrangement with my secretary to channel all routine 

--- Page 120 ---
114 HOWTOTHIfIKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 
telephone calls to me during a certain hour each day, placing all 
outgoing calls during a certain hour, cuttmg my usual confer­
ence periods from fifteen minutes to ten, giving all my dictation 
at one time each day. I also discovered my secretary could~and 
was eager to-take over a number of little time-consuming 
details for me. 
"I had been handling my present job for over two years, 
and fi'ankly, I was amazed to discover how much inefficiency I 
had let creep in. 
"Within a week's time, I was dictating twice as many let­
ters, handling 50 percent more phone calls, attending half again 
as many meetings-all with no strain. 
'f\. couple more weeks passed. The vice president called me 
in. He complimented me on doing a fine job. He went on to say 
that he had looked over a number of people from both inside and 
outside the bank but he had not yet found the right man. Then 
he confessed that he had already cleared with the bank's execu­
tive committee, and they had authorized him to cot;'bine the 
two jobs, put them both in my charge, and give me a substantial 
increase in salary. 
"I proved to myself that how much I can do depends on 
how much I think I can do." 
Capacity is indeed a state of mind. 
Every day, it seems, this takes place in the fast-moving 
world of business. The boss calls in an employee and explains 
that a special task must be accomplished. Then he says, "I 
know you've got a lot of work to do, but can you handle this?" 
Too often the employee replies, 'Tm awfully sorry, but I'm all 
loaded down now. I wish I could take it on, but I'm just too 
busy." 

--- Page 121 ---
HOWTOTHIHKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 115 
under the circumstances, the boss doesn't hold it against 
the employee, beca~se it is "extra duty," so to speak. But the boss 
realizes the task must be done, and he'll keep looking until he 
finds an employee who is just as busy as the rest but who feels 
he can take on more. And this employee is the fellow who will 
forge ahead. 
In business, in the home, in the community, the success 
combination is do what you do better (improve the quality of your 
output) and do more of what you do (increase the quantity of your 
output). 
Convinced it pays to do more and better? Then try this two-step 
procedure: 
1. Eagerly accept the opportunity to do more. It's a compli­
ment to be asked to take on a new responsibility. Accepting 
greater responsibility on the job makes you stand out and 
shows that you're more valuable. When your neighbors ask 
you to represent them on a civic matter, accept. It helps you 
to become a community leader. 
2. Next, concentrate on "How can I do more?" Creative 
answers will come. Some -of these answers may be better 
planning and organization of your present work or taking 
intelligent shortcuts in your routine activities, or possibly 
dropping nonessential activities altogether. But, let me 
repeat, the solution fur doing more will appear. 
As a personal policy I have accepted fully the concept: If 
you want it done, give it to a busy man. I refuse to work on 
important projects with persons who have lots of free time. I 

--- Page 122 ---
116 HOWTOTHIIIKANO DREAM CREATIVELY 
have learned from painful, expensive experience that the fellow 
who has plenty of time makes an ineffective work partner. 
All the successful, competent people I know are busy. 
When I start something, some project, with them, I know it will 
be satisfactorily completed. 
I have learned in dozens of instances that I can count on a 
busy man to deliver. But I have often been disappointed in work­
ing with people who have "all the time in the world." 
Progressive business management constantly asks, "What can 
we do to expand output?" Why not ask yourself, 'What can I do to 
expand my output?" Your mind will creatively show you how. 
In hundreds of interviews with people at all levels I've 
made this discovery: The bigger the person, the more apt he is 
to encourage you to talk; the smaller the person, the more apt he 
is to preach to you. 
Big people monopolize the liste1ting. 
Small people monopolize the talking. 
Note this also: Top-level leaders in all walks of life spend­
much more time requesting advice than they do in giving it. 
Before a top man makes a decision, he asks, "How do you feel 
about it)" "What do you recommend)" "What would you do 
under these circumstances)" "How does this sound to you)" 
Look at it this way: A leader is a decision-making human 
machine. Now; to manufacture anything, you've got to have raw 
material. In reaching creative decisions, the raw materials are the 
ideas and suggestions of others. Don't, of course, expect other 
people to give you ready-made solutions. That's not the primary 
reason for asking and listening. Ideas of others help to spark your 
own ideas so your mind is more creative. 
Recently I participated as a staff instructor in an executive 

--- Page 123 ---
HOWTOTHINKANO DREAM CREATIVELY 117 
management seminar. The seminar consisted of twelve sessions. 
One of the highiights of each meeting was a fifteen-minute dis­
cussion by one of the executives on the topic "How I solved my 
most pressing management problem." 
At the ninth session, the executive whose turn it was, a vice 
president of a large milk-processing company; did something 
different. Instead of telling how he had solved his problem, he 
announced his topic as "Needed: Help on solving my most press­
ing management problem." He quickly outlined his problem and 
then asked the group for ideas on solving it. To be sure he got 
a record of each idea suggested, he had a 'stenographer in the 
room taking down everything that was said. 
Later I talked with this man and complimented'him on his 
unique approach. His comment was "There are some very sharp 
men in this group. I just figured I'd harvest some ideas. There's 
a good possibility something someone said during that session 
may give me the clue I need to solve the problem." 
Note: this executive presented his problem, then listened. 
In so doing, he got some decision-making raw material, and, as 
a side benefit, the other executives in the audience enjoyed the 
discussion because it gave them the opportunity to take part. 
Successful businesses invest large sums in consumer 
research. They ask people about the taste, quality; size, and 
appearance of a product. Listening to people provides definite 
ideas for making the product more salable. It also suggests to 
the manufacturer what he should tell consumers about the 
product in his advertising. The procedure for developing suc­
cessful products is to get as much opinion as you can, listen 
to the people who wili buy the product, and then design the 
product and its promotion to please these people. 

--- Page 124 ---
118 HOWTO THINK ANO DREAM CREATIVELY 
In an office recently I noticed a sign that said, "To sell John 
Brown what John Brown buys, you've got to see things through 
John Brown's eyes." And the way to get John Brown's vision is to 
listen to what John Brown has to say. 
Your ears are your intake valves. They feed your mind raw 
materials that can be converted into creative power. We learn 
nothing from telling. But there is no limit to what we can learn 
by asking and listening. 
Try this three-stage program to strengthen your creativity 
through asking and listening: 
1. Encourage others to talk. In personal conversation or in 
group meetings, draw out people with little urges, such 
as "Tell me about your experience ... " or "What do you 
think should be done about ... ?" or "What do you think 
is the key point)" Encourage others to talk, and you win a 
double-barreled victory: your mind soaks up raw material 
that you can use to produce creative thought, and you win 
friends. There is no surer way to get people to like you 
than to encourage them to talk to you. 
2. Test your own views in the form of questions. Let other 
people help you smooth and polish your ideas. Use the 
what-do-you-think-of-this-suggestion? approach. Don't be 
dogmatic. Don't announce a fresh idea as if it were handed 
down on a gold tablet. Do a little informal research first. 
See how your associates react to it. If you do, chances are 
you'll end up with a better idea. 

--- Page 125 ---
HOW TO THINK Aim DREAM CREATIVELY 119 
3. Concentrate on what the other person says. Listening is 
more than just keeping your own mouth shut. Listening 
means letting what's said penetrate your mind. So often 
people pretend to listen when they aren't listening at all. 
They're just waiting for the other person to pause so they 
can take over with the talking. Concentrate on what the 
other person says. Evaluate it. That's how you collect mind 
food. 
More and more leading universities are offering advanced 
management training programs for senior' business executives. 
According to the sponsors, the big benefit of these programs 
is not that the executives get ready·made formulae that they 
can use to operate their business more efficiently. Rather, they 
benefit most from the opportunity to exchange and discuss new 
ideas. Many of these programs require the executives to live 
together in college dormitories, thus encouraging bull sessions. 
Boiled down to one word, the executives benefit most from the 
stimulation received. 
A year ago I directed two sessions in a one-week sales 
management school in Atlanta sponsored by the National Sales 
Executives, Inc. A few weeks later I met a salesman friend who 
worked for one of the sales executives who'd attended the 
school. 
"You people at the school sure gave my sales manager 
a lot of things to do to run our company better," my young 
friend said. Curious, I asked him specifically what changes he'd 
noticed. He reeled off a number of things-a revision in the 
compensation plan, sales meetings twice a month instead of 

--- Page 126 ---
120 HOWTO THINK ANO DREAM CREATIVELY 
once a month, new business cards and stationery; a revision 
in sales territories-not one of which was specifically recom­
mended in the training program. The sales manager didn't get 
a bunch of canned techniques. Instead, he got something much 
more valuable, the stimulation to think of ideas directly benefi­
cial to his own particular organization. 
A young accountant for a paint manufacturer told me about 
a very successful venture of his that was sparked by ideas of others. 
"I never had had more than a casual interest in real estate," 
he told me. "I've been a professional accountant for several years 
now, and I've stuck pretty close to my profession. One day a 
Realtor friend invited me to be his guest at a luncheon of one of 
the city's real estate groups. 
"The speaker that day was an older man who had seen 
the city grow. His talk was about 'The Next Twenty Years,' He 
predicted that the metropolitan area would continue to grow far 
out into the surrounding farmland. He also predicted that there 
would be a record demand for what he called gentlemen-size 
farms, two to five acres, big enough so the businessman or pro­
fessional person could have a pool, horses, a garden, and other 
hobbies that require space. 
"This man's talk really stimulated me. What he described 
was exactly what I wanted. The next few days I asked several 
friends what they thought about the idea of someday owning a 
five-acre estate. Everyone I talked to said, in effect, 'I'd love that.' 
"I continued to think about it and to figure how I could 
turn the idea into profit. Then one day as I was driving to work 
the answer came out of nowhere. Why not buy a farm and divide 
it into estates? I figured the land might be worth more in rela­
tively small pieces than in one big piece. 

--- Page 127 ---
HOWTO THINK ANO DREAM CREATIVELY 121 
"Twenty-two miles from the center of the city, I found a 
worn-out Hfty-acre farm priced at $8,500. I bought it, paying only 
one-third down and working out a mortgage with the owner for 
the balance. 
"Next, I planted pine seedlings where there were no trees. I 
did this because a real estate man whom I feel knows his business 
told me, 'People want trees these days, lots of trees!' 
"I wanted my prospective buyers to see that in a few years 
their estate would be covered with beautiful pine trees. 
"Then I got a surveyor to divide the Hfty acres into ten Hve­
acre plots. 
"Now I was ready ro start selling. I got several mailing lists 
of young execntives in the city and put on a small-scale direct­
mail campaign. I pointed out how; for only $3,000, the price of 
a small city lot, they could buy an estate. I also described the 
potentials for recreation and wholesome living. 
"In six weeks' time, working only eveuings and on week­
ends, I sold all ten plots. Total income: $30,000. Total costs, 
including the land, advertising, surveying and legal expenses: 
$10,400. ProHt: $19,600. 
"I made a nice proHt because I let myself be exposed to 
ideas of other intelligent people. Had I not accepted that invita­
tion to attend a luncheon with a group completely foreign to my 
occupational interests, my brain would have never worked out 
this successful plan for making a profit." 
There are many ways to get mental stimulation, but here 
are two that you can incorporate into your pattern of life. 
First, join and meet regularly with at least one professional 
group that provides stimulation in your own occupational area. 
Rub shoulders-and minds-with other success-oriented people. 

--- Page 128 ---
122 HOWTOTHINKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 
So often 1 hear someone say, "I picked up a great idea this noon 
at the --meeting" or "During the meeting yesterday 1 got to 
thinking ... " Remember, a mind that feeds only on itself soon 
is unclernourished, becoming weak and incapable of creative 
progressive thought. Stimulation from others is excellent mind 
food. 
Second, join and participate in at least one group outside 
your occupational interests. Association with people who have 
different job interests broadens your thinking and helps you to 
see the big picture. You'll be surprised how mixing regularly 
with people outside your occupational area will stimulate your 
on-the-job thinking. 
Ideas are fruits of your thinking. But they've got to be har­
nessed and put to work to have value. 
Each year an oak tree produces enough acorns to populate 
a good-sized forest. Yet from these bushels of seeds perhaps only 
one or two acorns will become a tree. The squirrels destroy most 
of them, and the hard ground beneath the tree doesn't give the 
few remaining seeds much chance for a start. 
So it is with ideas. Very few bear fruit. Ideas are highiy per­
ishable. If we're not on guard, the squirrels (negative-thinking 
people) will destroy most of them. Ideas require special handling 
from the time they are born until they're transformed into practi­
cal ways for doing things better. Use these three ways to harness 
and develop your ideas: 
1. Don't let ideas escape. Write them down. Every day lots of 
good ideas are born only to die quickly because they aren't 
nailed to paper. Memory is a weak slave when it comes to 
preserving and nurturing brand-new ideas. Carry a note-

--- Page 129 ---
HOWTOTHIlIKAND DREAM CREATIVELY 123 
book or some small cards with you. When you get an idea, 
write it down. A friend who travels a lot keeps a clipboard 
beside him so that he can write down an idea the instant it 
occurs to him. People with fertile, creative minds know a 
good idea may sprout any time, any place. Don't let ideas 
escape; else you destroy the fruits of your thinking. Fence 
them in .. 
2. Next, review your ideas. File these ideas in an active me. 
The me can be an elaborate cabinet, or it can be a desk 
drawer. A shoe box will do. But build a me and then exam­
ine your storehouse of ideas regularly. As you go over your 
ideas, some may, for very good reasons, have no value at all. 
Get rid of them. But so long as the idea has any promise, 
keep it. 
3. Cultivate and fertilize your idea. Now make your idea grow.' 
Think about it. Tie the idea to related ideas. Read anything 
you can find that is in any way akin to your idea. Investigate 
all angles. Then, when the time is. ripe, put it to work for 
yourself, your job, your future. 
When an architect gets an idea for a new building, he makes a 
preliminary drawing. When a creative advertising person gets an 
idea for a new TV commercial, he puts it into storyboard form, 
a series of drawings that suggest what the idea will look like in 
finished form. Writers with ideas prepare a first draft. 
Note: Shape up the idea on paper. There are two excellent 
reasons for this. When the idea takes tangible form, you can liter­
ally look at it, see the loopholes, see what it needs in the way of 

--- Page 130 ---
124 HOWTO THINK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 
polish. Then, too, ideas have to be "sold" to someone: custom­
ers, employees, the boss, friends, fellow club members, investors. 
Somebody must 'buy" the idea; else it has no value. 
One.summer I was contacted by two life insurance sales­
men. Both wanted to work on my insurance program. Both 
promised to return with a plan for making the needed changes. 
The first salesman gave me strictly an oral presentation. He 
told me in words what I needed. But I soon was confused. 
He brought in taxes, options, Social Security, all the technical 
details of insurance programming. Frankly, he lost me and I 
had to say no. 
The second salesman used a different approach. He had 
charted his recommendations. All the details were shown in dia­
gram form. I could grasp his proposal easily and quickly because 
I could literally see it. He sold me. 
Resolve to put your ideas in salable form. An idea written 
or in some sort of picture or diagram form has many times more 
selling powerthan the idea presented only in oral form. 
USE THESE TOOLS AND THINK CREATIVELY 
1. Believe it tan be done. When you believe something can 
be done, your mind will fmd the ways to do it. Believing a 
solution paves the way to solution. 
Eliminate «impossible," '\von't work," «can't do," uno 
use trying" from your thinking and speaking vocabulalies. 
2. Don't let tradition paralyze your mind. Be receptive to new 
ideas. Be experimental. Try new approaches. Be progressive 
. in everything you do. 

--- Page 131 ---
HOWTO THIlIK AND DREAM CREATIVELY 125 
3. Ask yourself daily, "How can I do better?" There is no limit 
to self.improvement. When you ask yourself, "How can I do 
better?" sound answers will appear. Tty it and see. 
4. Ask yourself, "How can I do more?" Capacity is a state 
of mind. Asking yourself tills question puts your mind ro 
work to fmd intelligent shortcuts. The success combination 
in business is: Do what you do better (improve the quality 
of your output), and: Do more of what you do (increase the 
quantity of your output). 
5. Practice asking and listening. Askandlisten, and you'll obtain 
raw material for reaching sound decisions. Remember: Big 
people monopolize the listening; small people monopolize 
the talking. 
6. Stretch your mind. Get stimulated. Associate with people 
who can help you tbink of new ideas, new ways of doing 
things. Mix with people of different occupational and social 
interests. 

--- Page 132 ---
6 
YOU ARE WHAT YOU THINK YOU ARE 
IT'S OBVIOUS, MUCII I-IUMAN behavior is puzzling, Have you 
ever wondered why a salesperson will greet one customer with an 
alert "Yes sir, may I serve you?" but virtually ignore another? Or 
why a man will open a door for one woman but not for another? 
Or why an employee will consistently carry out the instructions 
of 'one superior but only grudgingly do what another superior 
requests? Or why we will pay close attention to what one person 
says but not to another? 
Look around you, You'll observe some people receiving the 
"Hey; Mac" or "Hey; buddy" treatment while others receive the 
sincere and important "Yes, sir" treatment, Watch, You'll observe 
that some people command confidence, loyalty; and admiration 
while others do not. 
Look closer still, and you'll also observe that those persons 
who command the most respect are also the most successful. 
What is the explanation? It can be distilled into one word: 
thinking, Thinking does make it so. Others See in us what we see in 
ourselves, We receive the kind of treatment we think we deserve. 
Thinking does make it so, The fellow who thinks he is infe­
rior, regardless of what his real qualifications may be, is inferior, 

--- Page 133 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 127 
For thinking regulates actions. If a man feels inferior, he acts that 
way, and no veneer of cover-up or bluff will hide this basic feeling 
for long. The person who feels he isn't important, isn't. 
On the other side, a fellow who really thinks he.is equal to 
the task, is. 
To be important, we must think we are important, really 
think so; then others will think so too. Here again is the logic: 
How you think determiues how you act. 
How you act in turn determiues: 
How others react to you. 
Like other phases of your personal program for success, win­
ning respect is fundamentally simple. To gain the respect of others, 
you must first think you deserve respect. And the more respect you 
have for yourself, the more respect o.thers will have for you. Test this 
principle. Do you have much respect for the fellow on skid row? Of 
course not. Why? Because the poor fellow doesn't respect himsel£ 
He's letring himself rot away from lack of selfrespect. 
Self-respect shows through in everything we do. Let's focus 
our attention now on some of the specific ways we can increase 
self-respect and thereby earn more respect from others. 
LOOK IMPORTANT-IT HELPS YOU 
THINK IMPORTANT 
Rule: Remember, your appearance "talks." Be sure it says posi­
tive things about you. Never leave horne without feeling certain 
you look like the kind of person you want to be. 
The most honest advertisement ever appearing in print is the 
"Dress Right. You Can't Afford Not To!" slogan sponsored by the 

--- Page 134 ---
128 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
American Institute of Men's and Boys' Wear. Tbis slogan deserves 
to be framed in every office, restroom, bedroom, office, and school­
room in America. In one ad a policeman speaks. He says: 
You can usually spot a wrong kid just by the way he looks. 
Sure it's unfair, but it's a fact: people today judge a young­
ster by appearance. And once they've tabbed a boy, it's tough 
to change their minds about him, their attitude toward him. 
Look at your boy. Look at him through his teacher's eyes, 
your neighbors' eyes. Could the way Ite looks, the clothes 
he wears, give them the wrong impressionf Are you making 
sure he looks light, dresses right, everywhere he goesf 
This advertisement, of course, refers primarily to children. 
But it can be applied to adults as well. In the sentence begin­
ning with look, substitute the word yourself for /tim, your for his, 
superior's for teacher's, and associates' for neighbors', and reread the 
sentence. Look at yourself through your superior's eyes, your associ-
. ates' eyes. 
It costs so little to be neat. Take the slogan literally. Interpret 
it to say: Dress right; it always pays. Remember: look important 
because it helps you to think important. 
Use clothing as a tool to Iifr your spirits, build confidence. An 
old psychology professor of mine used to give this advice to students 
on last-minute preparations forfmal examinations: "Dress up for this 
important exam. Get a new tie. Have your suit pressed. Shine your 
shoes. Look sharp because it will help you think sharp." 
The professor knew his psychology. Make no mistake about 
it. Your physical exterior affects your mental interior. How you 
look on the outside affects how you think and feel on the inside. 

--- Page 135 ---
YOU ARE WHATVOU THINK YOU ARE 129 
All boys, I'm told, go through the "hat stage." That is, they 
use hats to identifY themselves with the person or character they 
want to be. I will always remember a hat incident with my own 
son, Davey. One day he was dead set on being the Lone Ranger, 
but he had no Lone Ranger hat. 
I tried to persuade him to substitute another. His protest 
was "But, Dad, I can't think like the Lone Ranger without a Lone 
Ranger hat." 
I gave in fmally and bought him the hat he needed. Sure 
enough, donning the hat, he was the Lone Ranger .. 
I often recall that incident because it says so much about the 
effect of appearance on thiuking. Anyone who has ever served in 
the Army knows a soldier feels and thinks like a soldier when he 
is in uniform. A woman feels more like going to a party when 
she is dressed for a party. 
By the same token, an executive feels more like an execu­
tive when he is dressed like one. A salesman expressed it to me 
this way: "I can't feel prosperous-and I have to if I'm going to 
make big sales-unless I know I look that way." 
Your appearance talks to you; but it also talks to others. It 
helps determine what others think of you. In theory, it's pleas­
ant to hear that people should look at a man's intellect, not ,his 
clothes. But don't be misled. People do evaluate you on the basis 
of your appearance. Your appearance is the first basis for evalua­
tion other people have. And first impressions last, out of all pro­
portion to the time it takes to form them. 
In a supermarket one day I noticed one table of seedless 
grapes marked 15 cents a pound. On another table were what 
appeared to be identical grapes, this time packaged in polyethyl­
ene bags' and marked 2 pounds for 35 cents. 

--- Page 136 ---
130 YOU ARE WHATYOUTHINKYOU ARE 
I asked the young fellow at the weighing station, 'What's 
the difference between the grapes priced at 15 cents a pound and 
those priced at two pounds for 35 cents?" 
"The difference," he answered, "is polyethylene. We sell 
about twice as many of the grapes· in the polyethylene bags. 
They look better that way." 
Think about the grape example the next time you're selling 
yourself. Properly "packaged," you have a better chance to make 
the sale-and at a higher price. 
The point is: the better you are packaged, the more public 
acceptance you will receive. 
Tomorrow watch who is shown the most respect and cour­
tesy in restaurants, on buses, in crowded lobbies, in stores, and 
at work. People look at another person, make a quick and often 
subconscious appraisal, and then treat him accordingly. 
We look at some people and respond with the "Hey, Mac" atti­
tude. We look at others and respond with the "Yes, sir" feeling. 
Yes, a person's appearance defInitely talks. The well-dressed 
person's appearance says positive things. It tells people, "Here is 
an important person: intelligent, prosperous, and dependable. 
This inan can be looked up to, admired, trusted. He respects 
himself, and I respect him." 
The shabby-looking fellow's appearance says negative 
things. It says, "Here is a person who isn't doing well. He's care­
less, inefficient,' unimportant. He's just an average person. He 
deserves no special consideration. He's used to being pushed 
around." 
When I stress "Respect your appearance" in training 
programs, almost always I am asked the question 'Tm sold. 
Appearance is important. But how do you expect me to afford 

--- Page 137 ---
YOU ARE WHAT YOU THINK YOU ARE 131 
the kind of clothing that really makes me feel right and that 
causes others to look up to mel" 
That question puzzles many people. It plagued me for a 
long time. But the answer is really a simple one: Pay twice as 
much and buy half as many. Commit this answer to memory. Then 
practice it. Apply it to hats, suits, shoes, socks, coats--everything 
you wear. Insofar as appearance is concerned, quality is far more 
impo~tant than quantity. When youpractice this principle, you'll 
fmd that both your respect for yourself and the respect of others 
for you will zoom upward. And you'll fmd you're actually ahead 
money-wise when you pay twice as much and buy half as many 
because: 
1. Your garments will last more than twice as long because 
they are more than twice as good, and as a rule they will 
show "quality" as long as they last. 
2. What you buy will stay in style longer. Better clothing 
always does. 
3. You'll get better advice. Merchants selling $200 suits are 
usually much more interested in helping you fmd the gar­
ment that is "just right" for you than are merchants selling 
$100 suits. 
Remember: Your appearance talks to you and it talks to 
others. Make certain it says, "Here is a person who has self­
respect. He's important. Treat him that way." 
You owe it to others-but, more important, you owe it to your­
self-to look your best. 

--- Page 138 ---
132 YOUAREWHATYOUTHIflKYOUARE 
You are what you think you are. If your appearance makes 
you think you're inferior, you are inferior. If it makes you think 
small, you are small. Look your best and you will think and act 
your best. 
THINK YOUR WORK IS IMPORTANT 
There's a story often told about the job attitudes of three brick­
layers. It's a classic, so let's go over it again. 
When asked, "What are you doing?" the first bricklayer 
replied, "Laying brick." The second answered, "Making $9.30 an 
hour." And the third said, "Me? Why, I'm building the world's 
greatest cathedra!." 
Now, the story doesn't tell us what happened to these brick­
layers in later years, but what do you think happened? Chances 
are that the first two bricklayers remained just that: bricklayers. 
They lacked vision. They lacked job respect. There was nothing 
behind them to propel them forward to greater success. 
But you can wager every cent you have the-bricklayer who 
visualized himself as building a great cathedral did not remain a 
bricklayer. Perhaps he became a foreman, or perhaps a contrac­
tor, or possibly an architect. He moved forward and upward. 
Why? Because thinking does make it so. Bricklayer number three 
was tuned to thought channels that pointed the way to self-devel­
opment in his work. 
Job thinking tells a lot about a person and his potential for 
larger responsibility. 
A friend who operates a personnel selection firm said this 
to me recently: "One thing we always look for in appraising a job 
applicant for a client is how the applicant thinks about his pres­
ent job. We are always fiworably impressed when we find that an 

--- Page 139 ---
YOU ARE WHATVOU THINK YOU ARE 133 
applicant thinks his present job is important, even though there 
may be something about it he doesn't like. 
"Why? Simply this: If the applicant feels his present job is 
important, odds are that he will take pride in his next job, too. 
We've found an amazingly close correlation between a person's 
job respect and his job performance." 
Like your appearance, the way you think toward your work 
says things about you to your superiors, associates, and subordi­
nates-in fact, to everyone with whom you come in contact. ' 
A few months ago I spent several hours with a friend who 
is personnel director for an appliance manufacturer. We taiked 
about 'building men." He explained his "personnel audit sys­
tem" and what he had learned fi'om it. 
"We have about eight hundred nonproduction people," 
he began. "Under our personnei audit system, an assistant and 
I interview each employee every six months. Our purpose is 
simple. We want to learn how we can help him in his job. We 
think this is a good practice because each person working with 
us is important, else he wouldn't be on the payroll. 
"We are careful not to ask the employees any point-blank 
questions. Instead we encourage him to talk about whatever he 
wants to. We aim to get his honest impressions. After each inter­
view we fill out a rating furm on the employee's attitudes toward 
specific aspects of his job. 
"Now, here's something I've learned," he went on. "Our 
employees fit into one of two categories, group A and group B, 
on the basis of how they think toward their jobs. 
"The persons in group B talk mainly about security, com­
pany retirement plans, sick leave policy, extra time off, what 
we're doing to improve the insurance program, and if they will 

--- Page 140 ---
134 YOU ARE WHAT YOU THINK YOU ARE 
be asked to work overtime next March as they were last March. 
They also talk a lot about disagreeable features of their job, 
things they don't like in fellow workers, and so on. People in 
group B-and they include close to 80 percent of all nonproduc­
tion personnel-view their jobs as a sort of necessary evil. 
"The group A fellow sees his job through diffe!'ent glasses. 
He is concerned about his future and wants concrete suggestions 
on what he can do to make faster progress. He doesn't expe~t 
us to give him anything except a chance. The group A people 
think on a broader scale. They make suggestions for improving 
the business. They regard these interviews in my office as con­
structive. But the group B people often feel our personnel audit 
system is just a brainwashingaffair, and they're glad to get it over 
with. 
"Now, there's a way I check attitudes and what they mean to 
job success. All recommendations for promotions, pay increases, 
and special privileges are channeled to me by the employee's 
immediate supervisor. Almost invariably; it's a group A person 
who was recommended. And again almost without exception, 
problems come fi'om the group B category. . 
"The biggest challenge ill my job," he said, "is to try and 
help people move from group B to group A. It's not easy; though, 
because until a person thinks his job is important and thinks posi­
tively about it, he can't be helped." 
This is concrete evidence that you are what you think you 
are, what your thought power directs you to become. Think 
you're weak, think you lack what it takes, think you will lose, 
think you are second·class-think this way; and you are doomed 
to mediocrity. 

--- Page 141 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 135 
But think instead, I am important. I do have what it takes. I am 
a first-class peiformer. My work is important. Think this way, and 
you're headed straight to success. 
The key to winning what you want lies in thinking posi­
tively toward youtself. The only real basis other people have for 
judging your abilities is your actions. And your actions are con­
trolled by your thoughts. 
You are what you think you are. 
Wear the shoes of a supervisor for a few moments and ask 
yourself which person you would recommend for a raise or a 
promotion: 
1. The secretary who, when the executive is out of the office, 
spends her time reading magazines or the secretary who 
uses such time to do the many little things that help the 
executive to accomplish more when he returns? 
2. The employee who says, "Oh well, I can always get another 
job. If they don't like the way I do my work, I'll just quit" 
or the employee who views criticism constructively and 
sincerely tries to do higher-quality work? 
3. The salesman who tells a customer, "Oh, I just do what 
they tell me to do. They said come out and see if you need 
anything" or the salesman who says, "Mr. Brown, I'm here 
to help you"? 
4. The foreman who says to an employee, "To tell you the 
truth, I don't like my job much. Those guys up top give me 

--- Page 142 ---
136 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
a pain in the neck. I don't know what they're talking about 
half the timen or the supervisor who says, "You've got to 
expect some unpleasantness on any job. But let me assure 
you, the men in the front office are on the ball. They'll do 
right by usn, 
Isn't it obvious why many people stay at one level all their 
lives? Their thinking alone keeps them there. 
An advertising executive once. told me about his agency's 
informal training to ''break inn new, inexperienced men. 
':As company policy,n he said, "we feel the best initial train­
ing is to start the young fellow, who, incidentally, is usually a 
college graduate, as a mail boy. We don't do this, of course, 
because we feel a fellow needs four years of college to take mail 
from one office to another. Our purpose is to give the new fel­
low maximum exposure to the many varied things which must 
be done in agency work. After he knows his way around, we give· 
him an assignment. 
"Now, occasionally, even after we've carefully explained 
why we're starting him out in the mail room, a young fellow feels 
that carrying the mail is belittling and unimportant. When this 
is the case, we know we've picked the wrong man. If he doesn't 
have the vision to see that being a mail boy is a necessary, practi­
cal step to important assignments, then he has no future in the 
agency business.n 
Remember, executives answer the question What would he 
do on that specific level? by first answering the question What kind 
of job is he doing where he is now? 
Here is some logic, sound, straight, and easy. Read it at least 
five times before you go on: 

--- Page 143 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 137 
A person who thinks his job is important 
Receives mmtal signals on how to do his job better; 
And a better job means 
More promotions, more money, more prestige, more hap­
piness. 
We've all noticed how children quickly pick up the atti­
tudes, habits, feqrs, and preferences of their parents. Whether it 
be food preferences, mannerisms, .religious and political views, 
or any other type of behavior, the child is a living reflection 
of how his parents '01' guardians think; for he learns through 
imitation. 
And so do adults! People continue to imitate others 
throughont life. And they imitate their leaders and supervisors; 
their thoughts and actions are influenced by these people. 
You can check this easily. Study one of your friends and the 
person he works for, and note the similarities in thinking and 
action. 
Here are some of the ways your friend may imitate his boss 
01' other associate: slang and word choice, the way he smokes 
cigarettes, some facial expressions and mannerisms, choice of 
clothing, and automobile preferences. There are many, many 
more, of course. 
Another way to note the power of imitation is to observe 
the attitudes of employees and compare them with those of 
the" chief." When the chief is nervous, tense, worried, his close 
associates reflect similar attitudes. But when Mr. Chief is on top, 
feeling good, so are his employees. 
The point is this: 11te way we think toward our jobs determines 
how our subordinates think toward their jobs. 

--- Page 144 ---
138 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
The job attitudes of our subordinates are direct reflections 
of our own job attitudes. It's well to remember that our points 
of superiority-and weakness-show up in the behavior of those 
who report to us, just as a chlld reflects the attitudes of his par­
ents. 
Consider just one characteristic of successful people: enthusi­
asm. Ever notice how an enthusiastic salesperson in a depart­
ment store gets you, the customer, more excit~d about the 
merchandise? Or have you observed how an enthusiastic minister 
or other speaker has a wide-awake, alert, enthusiastic audience? 
If you have enthusiasm, those around you will have it, too. 
But how does one develop enthusiasm? The basic step is 
simple: Think enthusiastically. Build in yourself an optimistic, 
progressive glow; a feeling that "this is great and I'm 100 percent 
for it." 
You are what you think. Think enthusiasm and you'll be 
enthusiastic. To get high-quality work, be enthusiastic about the 
job you want done. Others will catch the enthusiasm you gener­
ate and you'll get first-class performance. 
But if, in negative fashion, you "cheat" that company on 
expense money, supplies, and time, and in other little ways, 
then what can you expect your subordinates to do? Habitually 
arrive late and leave early; and what do you think the "troops" 
will do? 
And there is a major incentive for us to think right about 
our jobs so that our subordinates will think right about their jobs. 
Our superiors evaluate us by measuring the quality and quantity 
of output we get from those reporting to us. 
Look at it this way: whom would you elevate to division 

--- Page 145 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 139 
sales manager-the branch sales manager whose salesmen are 
doing superior work or the branch sales manager whose sales­
men deliver only average performance? 01' whom would you 
recommend for promotion to production manager-the supervi­
sor whose department meets its quota or the super:risor whose 
department lags behind? 
Here are two suggestions for getting others to do more for 
you: 
1. Always show positive attitudes toward your job so that your 
subordinates will "pick up" right thinking. 
2. As you approach your job each day, ask yourself, '1\m 
I worthy in every respect of being imitated? Are all my 
habits such that I would be glad to see them in my subordi­
nates?" 
GIVE YOURSELF A PEP TALK SEVERAL 
TIMES DAILY 
Several months ago an automobile salesman told me about the 
success-producing technique he's developed. It makes sense. 
Read it. 
'1\ big part of my job, for two hours a day," the salesman 
explained, "is telephoning prospects to arrange demonstration 
appointtnents. When I first started selling cars three years ago, 
this was my big problem. I was shy and afraid, and I know my 
voice sounded that way on the phone. It was easy for people I 
called to say, 'I'm not interested: and hang up. 
"Every Monday morning back then our sales manager held 
a sales meeting. It was a pretty inspirational affair, and it made 

--- Page 146 ---
140 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
me feel good. And what's more, I always seemed to arrange 
more demonstrations on Monday than on any other day. But the 
trouble was that little of Monday's inspiration carried over ro 
Tuesday and the rest of the week. 
'Then I got an idea. If the sales manager can pep me up, 
why can't I pep myself up? Why not give myself a pep talk just 
before I start making those phone calls? That day I decided to 
try it. Without telling anyone I walked out on the lot and found 
a vacant car. Then for several minutes I talked to myself. I told 
myself, 'I'm a good car salesman and I'm going to be the best. 
I sell good cars and I give good deals. The people I'm phoning 
need those cars and I'm going to sell them.' 
"Well, from the very beginning this self·supercharging paid 
off. I felt so good I didn't dread making those calls. I wanted to 
make them. I no longer go out on the lot and sit in a car to give 
myself a pep talk. But I still use the technique. Before I dial a 
number I silently remind myself that I'm a top·notch salesman 
and I'm going to get results, and I do." 
That's a pretty good idea, isn't it? To be on top, you've got 
to feel like you're on top. Give yourself a pep talk and discover 
how much bigger and stronger you feel. 
Recently, in a training program I conducted, each person was 
asked to give a ten·minute talk on 'being a leader." One of the train· 
ees gave a miserable presentation. His knees literally shook and his 
hands trembled. He forgot what he was going to say. After fumbling 
for five or six minutes, he sat down, thoroughly defeated. 
After the session, I spoke to him just long enough to ask 
him to be there fifteen minutes early at the next session. 
As promised, he was there fifteen minutes ahead of time 
for the next session. The two of us sat down to discuss his talk of 

--- Page 147 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 141 
the night before. I asked him to remember as clearly as he could 
exactly what he had thought about the five minutes just before 
he gave his talk. 
'Well, I guess all I thought about was how scared I was. I 
knew I was going to make a fool of myself. I knew I was going 
to be a flop. I kept thinking, 'Who am I to be talking about being 
a leader?' I tried to remember what I was going to say, but all I 
could think about was failing." 
"Right there," I injected, "is the answer to your problem. 
Before you got up to talk you gave yourself a terrible mental 
beating. You convinced yourself that you would fail. Is it any 
wonder your talk didn't come off well? Instead of developing 
courage, you developed fear. 
"Now, this evening's session," I continued, "starts in just 
four minutes. Here's what I'd like you to do. Give yourself a pep 
talk for the next few minutes. Go in that vacant room across 
the hall and tell yourself, T m going to give a great talk. I've got 
something those people need to hear and I want to say.' Keep 
repeating those sentences forcefully, with complete conviction. 
Then come into the conference room and give your talk again." 
I wish you could have been there to hear the difference. 
That brief, self-administered, hard-hitting pep talk helped him to 
make a splendid speech. 
The moral: Practice uplifting self-praise. Don't practice 
belittling self-punishment. 
You are what you think you are. Think more of yourself 
and there is more of you. 
Build your own "sell-yourself-to-yourself" commercial. Think 
for a moment about one of America's most popular products, 

--- Page 148 ---
142 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
Coca-Cola. Every day your eyes or ears come in contact many 
times with the good news about Coke. The people who make 
Coca~Cola are continually reselling you on Coke, and for a good 
reason. If they stopped reselling you, chances are you'd grow 
lukewarm and eventually cold to Coke. Then sales would drop. 
But the Coca-Cola Company isn't going to let this happen. 
They resell you and resell you and resell you on Coke. 
Every day you and I see half-alive people who are no longer 
sold on themselves. They lack self-respect for their most impor­
tant product-themselves. These folks are indifferent. They feel 
small. They feel like nobodies; and because they feel that way, 
that's what they are. 
The half-alive person needs to be resold on himself. He 
needs to realize that he's a first-class person. He needs honest, 
sincere belief in himself. 
Tom Staley is a young fellow who is going places-and fast. 
Tom regularly resells himself on himself three times every day 
with what he calls "Tom Staley'S 60-Second Commercial." He 
carries his personalized commercial in his billfold at all times. 
Here is exactly what it says: 
Tom Staley, meet Tom Staley---<ln important, a really impor­
tant persOlI. Tom, you're a big thinker, so think big. Think 
Big about Everything. You've got plenty of ability to do a 
first-class job, so do a first-class job. 
Tom, you believe in Happiness, Progress, and Prosperity. 
So: talk only Happiness, 
talk only Progress, 
talk only Prosperity. 
You have lots of drive, Tom, lots of drive. 

--- Page 149 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 143 
So put that drive to work. Nothillg can stop you, Tom, 
nothing. 
Tom, you're entlillSiastic. Let your enthusiasm show 
through. 
You look good, Tom, and you foel good. Stay that way. 
Tom Staley, you were a great follow yesterday and you're 
going to be an even greater follow today. Now go to it, 
Tom. Go forward. 
Tom credits his commercial with helping him become a 
more successful, dynamic person. "Before I started selling myself 
to myself," says Tom, "I thought I was inferior to just about any· 
body and everybody. Now I realize that I've got what it takes to 
win and I'm winning. And I'm always going to win." 
Here's how to build your "sell-yourself to-yourself" commercial. 
'First, select your assets, your points of superiority. Ask yourself, 
''What are my best qualities?" Don't be shy in describing yO';lrself. 
Next, put these points down on paper in your own words. 
Write your commercial to you. Reread Tom Staley s commercial. 
Notice how he talks to Tom. Talk to yourself. Be very direct. 
Don't think of anyone but you as you say your commercial. 
Third, practice your commercial out loud in private at least . 
once a day. It helps a lot to do this before a mirror. Put your body 
into it. Repeat your commercial forcefully with determination. 
Make your blood travel faster through your body. Get yourself 
warmed up. 
Fourth, read your commercial silently several times every 
day. Read it before you tackle anything that demands courage. 
Read it every time you feel let down. Keep your commercial 
handy at all· times-then use it. 

--- Page 150 ---
144 YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 
Just one thing more. A lot of people, maybe even a major­
ity, may ''ho ho" at this success-rewarding technique. That's 
because they refuse to believe that success comes from man­
aged thinking. But please! Don't accept the judgment of average 
people. You are not average. If you have any doubts as to the 
basic soundness of the "sell-yourself-to-yourself" principle, ask 
the most successful person you know what he thinks about it. 
Ask him, and then start selling yourself to yourself. 
UPGRADE YOUR THINKING. THINK LIKE 
IMPORTANT PEOPLE THINK 
Upgrading your thinking upgrades your actions, and this produces 
success. Here is an easy way to help you make more of yourself 
by thinking like important people think. Use the form below as a 
guide. 
HOW AM I THINKING? CHECKLIST 
SITUATION 
1. When I worry 
2. Anidea 
3. My appearance 
4. My language 
5. What I read 
6. Conversation ASK YOURSELF 
Would an important person worry about 
this? 
Would the most successful person I 
know be disturbed about this? 
What would an important person do if 
he had this idea? 
Do I look like someone who has maxi­
mum self-respect? 
Am I using the language of successful 
people? 
Would an important person read trus? 
Is this something successful people 
would discuss? 

--- Page 151 ---
YOU ARE WHATYOU THINK YOU ARE 145 
SITUATION ASK YOURSElF 
7. When I lose my temper Would an important person get mad at 
what I'm mad at? 
8. My jokes Is this the kind of joke an important per­
son would tell? 
9. _My job How does an important person describe 
_~____~ ___ hisj()b to_otl1::s~_. _______ _ 
Cement in your mind the question "Is this the wayan 
important person does it)" Use this question to make you a big­
ger. more successful person. 
In a nutshell. remember: 
1. Look important; it helps you think important. Your appear­
ance talks to you. Be sure it lifts your spirits and builds your 
confidence. Your appearance talks to others. Make certain 
it says. "Here is an important person: intelligent. prosper­
ous. and dependable." 
2. Think your work is important. Think this way; and you will 
receive mental signals on how to do your job better. Think 
your work is important, and your subordinates will think 
their work is important too. 
3. Give yourself a pep talk several times daily. Build a "sell­
yourself-to-yourself" commercial. Remind yourself at every 
opportunity that you're a first-class person. 
4. In all of life's situations, ask yourself, "Is this the wayan 
important person thinks?" Then obey the answer. 

--- Page 152 ---
7 
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: 
GO FIRST CLASS 
your< MIND IS AN amazing mechanism. When youI' mind works 
one way, it can carry you forward to outstanding success. But the 
same mind operating in a different manner can produce a total 
failure. 
The mind is the most delicate, most sensitive instrument in 
all creation. Let's look now and see what makes the mind think 
the way it does. Millions of people are diet conscious. We're a 
calorie-counting nation. We spend millions of dollars on vitamins, 
minerals, and other dietary supplements. And we all know why. 
Through nutritional research, we've learned that the body reflects 
the diet fed the body. Physical stamina, resistance to disease, body 
size, even how long we live are all closely related to what we eat. 
The body is what the body is fed. By the same token, the 
mind is what the mind is fed. Mind food, of course, doesn't 
come in packages, and you can't buy it at the store. Mind food is 
your environment-all the countless things that influeqce your 
conscious and subconscious thought. The kind of mind food we 
consume determines our habits, attitudes, personality. Each of 
us inherited a certain capacity to develop. But how much of that 

--- Page 153 ---
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 147 
capacity we have developed and the way we have developed that 
capacity depends on the kind of mind food we feed it. 
The mind reflects what its environment feeds it just as 
surely as the body reflects the food you feed it. 
Have you ever thought what kind of person you would 
be had you been reared in some foreign country instead of the 
United States? What kinds of foods would you' prefer? Would 
your preferences for clothing be the same? What sort of enter­
tainment would you like the most? What kind of work would 
you be doing? What would your religion be? 
You can't, of course, be sure of the answers to these ques­
tions. But chances are you would be a materially different person 
had you grown up in a different country. Why? Because you 
would have been influenced by a different environment. As the 
saying goes, you are a product of your environment. 
Mark it well. Environment shapes us, makes us think the 
way we do. Try to name just one habit or one mannerism you 
have that you did not pick up from other people. Relatively minor 
things, like the way we walk, cough, hold a cup; our preferences 
for music, literature, entertainment, clothing-all stem in very 
large part from environment. 
More important, the size of your thinking, your goals, your 
attitudes, your very personality is formed by your environment. 
Prolonged association with negative people makes us think 
negatively; close contact with petty individuals develops petty 
habits in us. On the bright side, companionship with people with 
'" big ideas raise.s the level of our thinking; close contact with ambi-
tious people gives us ambition. 
Experts agree that the person you are today, your person­
ality, ambitions, present status in life, are largely the result of 

--- Page 154 ---
148 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 
your psychological environment. And experts agree also that the 
person you will be one, five, ten, twenty years from now depends 
almost entirely on your future environment. 
You will change over the months and years. This we knOw. 
But how you will change depends on your future environment, 
the mind food you feed yourself. Let's look now at what we can 
. do to make our future environment payoff in satisfaction and 
prosperity. 
RECONDITION YOURSELF FOR SUCCESS 
The number one obstacle on the road to high-level success is the 
feeling that major accomplishment is beyond reach. This attitude 
stems fi'om many, many suppressive forces that direct our think­
ing toward mediocre levels. 
To understand these suppressive forces, let's go back to the 
time we were children. As children, all of us set high goals. At a 
surprisingly young age we made plans to conquer the unknown, 
to be leaders, to attain positions of high importance, to do excit­
ing and stimulating things, to become wealthy and famous-in 
short, to be first, biggest, and best: And in our blessed ignorance 
we saw our way clear to accomplish these goals. 
But what happened? Long before we reached the age when 
we could begin to work toward our great objectives,. a multitude 
of suppressive influences went to work. 
From all sides we heard "It's foolish to be a dreamer" and 
that our ideas were "impractical, stupid, naive, or foolish," that 
you have "got to have money to go places," that "luck determines 
who gets ahead or you've got to have important friends," or 
you're "too old or too young." 
As a result of being bombarded with. the "yoy"can't-

--- Page 155 ---
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 149 
get-ahead-so-don't-bother-to-try" propaganda, most people you 
know can be classified into three groups: 
First group: Those who surrendered completely. The majority of peo­
ple are convinced deep down inside that they haven't got what it 
takes, that real success, real accomplishment, is for others who 
are lucky or fortunate in some special respect. You can easily 
spot these people because they go to great lengths to rationalize 
their status and explain how "happy" they really are. 
A very intelligent man, age thirty-two, who has dead-ended 
himself in a safe but mediocre position, recently spent hours tell­
ing me why he was so satisfied with his job. He did a good job 
of rationalizing, bnt he was only kidding himself and he knew 
it. What he really wanted was to work in a challenging situation 
where he could grow and develop. But that "multitude of sup­
pressive influences" had convinced him that he was inadequate 
for big things. 
This group is, in reality, just the other extreme of the dis­
contented job switcher searching for opportunity. Rationalizing 
yourself into a rut, which incidentally has been described a~ a 
grave with both ends open, can be as bad as wandering aim­
lessly, hoping opportunlty will somehow; someday hit you in 
the face. 
Second group: Those who surrendered partially. A second but much 
smaller group enters adult life with considerable hope for suc­
cess. These people prepare themselves. They work. They plan. 
But, after a decade or so, resistance begins to build up, compe­
tition for top-level jobs looks rugged. This group then decides 
that greater success is not worth the effort. 

--- Page 156 ---
150 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 
They rationalize, "We're earning more than the average 
and we live better than the average. Why should we knock our­
selves out)" 
Actually, this group has developed a set of fears: fear of 
failure, fear of social disapproval, fear of insecurity, fear of los­
ing what they already have. These people aren't satisfied because 
deep down they know they have surrendered. This group 
includes many talented, intelligent people who elect to crawl 
through life because they are afraid to stand up and run. 
Third group: Those who never surrender. This group, maybe 2 or 
3 percent of the total, doesn't let pessimism dictate, doesn't 
believe in surrendering to suppressive forces, doesn't believe in 
crawling. Instead, these people live and breathe success. This 
group is the happiest because it accomplishes the most. These 
people become top salesmen, top executives, top leaders in their 
respective fields. These people find life stimulating, rewarding, 
worthwhile. These people look forward to each new day, each 
new encounter with other' people, as adventures to be lived . ' 
fully. 
Let's be honest. All of us would like to be in the third 
group, the one that finds greater success each year, the one that 
do.es things and gets results. 
To get-and stay-in this group, however, we must fight 
off the suppressive influences of our environment. To unde.r­
stand how persons in the first and second groups will unwittingly 
tty to hold you back, study this example. 
Suppose you tell several of your "average" friends, with the 
greatest 'sincerity: "Someday I'm going to be vice president of 
this company." 

--- Page 157 ---
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 151 
What will happen? Your friends will probably dunk you are 
joking. And if they should believe you mean it, chances are they 
will say, "You poor guy, you sure have a lot to learn." 
Behind your back they may even question whetl;er you 
have all your marbles. 
Now, assume you repeat the same statement with equal sin­
cerity to the president of your company. How will he react) One 
thing is certain: he will not laugh. He will look at you intently and 
ask rumself: "Does this fellow really mean this?" 
But he will not, we repeat, laugh. 
Because big men do not laugh at big Ideas. 
Or suppose you tell some average people you plan to own 
an expensive home, and they may laugh at you because they 
think it's impossible. But tell your pian to a person already living 
in an expensive home, and he won't be surprised. He knows it 
isn't impossible, because he's already done it. 
Remember: People who tell you it cannot be done almost always 
are ullSuccessfol people, are strictly average or mediocre at best in terms 
of accomplishment. The opinions' of these people can be poison. 
Develop a defense against people who want to convince 
you that you can't do it. Accept negative advice only as a chal~ 
lenge to prove that you can do it. 
Be extra, extra cautious about trus: dont let negative-thinking 
people-"negators" --destroy your plan to thlnk yourself to 
success. Negators are everywhere, and they seem to delight in. 
sabotaging the positive progress of others. 
During college I buddied for a couple of semesters with 
W. W. He was a fine friend, the kind of fellow who would loan 
you a little money when you were short or help you in many 

--- Page 158 ---
152 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 
little ways. Despite this fine loyalty, W W was just about 100 
percent sour and bitter toward life, the future, opportunity. He 
was a real negator. 
During that period I was an enthusiastic reader of a certain 
newspaper columnist who stressed hope, the positive approach, 
opportunity. When W W would find me reading this columnist, 
or when her column was mentioned, he'd swing verbally and say, 
"Oh, for Pete's sake, Dave. Read the front page. That's where you 
learn about life. You ought to know that columnist is just making 
a quick buck dishing out sweet sauce for the weak." 
When our discussions turned to getting ahead in life, W W 
was right there with his moneymaking formula. In his own 
words, it went like this: "Dave, there are just three ways to make 
money these days. One, marry a rich woman: two, steal in a nice, 
clean, legal way; or three, get to know the right people, some­
body with plenty of pull." 
W W was always prepared to defend his formula with 
examples. Sticking to the front page, he 'was qUick to cite that 
one labor leader in a thousand who had siphoned off a pile of 
money from the union till and got away with it. He kept his 
eyes open for that rare, rare marriage of the fruit picker to Miss 
Millionaire. And he knew a fellow who knew a fellow who knew 
a big man and got cut in on a big deal that made him rich. 
W W was several years older than I, and he made excel­
lent grades in his engineering classes. I looked up to him in a 
younger-brother sort of way. I came dangerously close to ditch­
ing my basic convictions about what it takes to be a success and 
accepting the negators' philosophy. 
Fortunately, one evening after a long discussion with W W 
I grabbed hold of myself. It dawned on me that I was listening 

--- Page 159 ---
MAIIAGEYOUR EIIVIROIIMEIIT: GO FIRST CLASS 153 
to the voice of failure. It seemed to me W. W. was talking more 
to convince himself than he was to convert me to his way of 
thinking. From then on I regarded W. W. as an object lesson, a 
sort of experimental guinea pig. Rather than buy what he said, I 
studied him, trying to figure out why he thought the way he did 
and where such thinking would take him. I turned my negator 
friend into a personal experiment. 
I haven't seen w. W. in eleven years. But a mutual friend saw 
him just a few months ago. W. W. is working as a low-paid drafts­
man in Washington. I asked my friend whether W. W. has changed. 
"No, except if anything he's more negative than when we 
knew him. He's having a tough go of it. He has four children, and 
on his income it's rough. Old W. W. has the brains to be making 
five times what he is if he just knew how to use those brains." 
Negators are everywhere. Some negators, Ilke the one who 
almost tripped me, are well-meaning folks. But others are jealous 
people who, not moving ahead themselves, want you to stumble 
too. They feel inadequate themselves, so they want to make a 
mediocre person out of you. 
Be extra careful. Study negators. Don't let them destroy 
your plans for success. 
A young office worker recendy explained to me why he had 
changed car pools. "One fellow," he said, "talked about nothing 
trip in and trip out except what an awful company we worked for. 
Regardless of what management did, he found fault. He was nega­
tive about everyone from his supervisor on up. The products we 
sold were no good. Every policy had something wrong with it. As 
he saw it, absolutely everything had something wrong with it. 
"Each morning I arrived at work tense and wound up tight. 
And each night, after hearing him preach and rant for forty-five 

--- Page 160 ---
154 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 
minutes about all the things that went wrong that day, I got home 
discouraged and depressed. Finally, I got sense enough to get in 
another car pool. It's made a world of difference, for now I'm 
with a group of fellows who cali see two sides to a question." 
That young fellow changed his environment. Smart, wasn't 
he? 
Make no mistake about it. You are judged by the company 
you keep. Birds of a feather do flock together. Fellow work­
ers are not all alike. Some are negative, others positive. Some 
work because they "have to"; others are ambitious and work for 
advancement. Some associates belittle everything the boss says 
or does; others are much more objective and realize they must 
be good followers before they can be good leaders. 
How we think is directly affected by the group we're in. Be 
sure you're itt the flock that thinks right. 
There are pitfalls to watch in your work environment. In 
every group there are persons who, secretly. aware of their own 
inadequacies, want to stand in your way and prevent you from 
making progress. Many ambitious fellows have been laughed at, 
even threatened, because they tried to be more efficient and pro­
duce more. Let's face it. Some folks, being jealous, want to make 
you feel embarrassed because you want to move upward. 
This often happens in factories, where fellow workers 
sometimes resent the fellow who wants to speed up production. 
It happens in the military service when a clique of negative­
minded individuals poke fun at and try to humiliate the young 
soldier who wants to go to officers' school. 
It happens in business, too, when a few individuals not 
qualified to advance try to block the way for someone else. 

--- Page 161 ---
MANAGEYOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 155 
You've seen it happen time and again in high schools when 
a group of lunkheads deride a classmate who has the good sense 
to make the most of his educational opportunities and come 
out with high grades. Sometimes-and all too sadly often-the 
bright student is jeered at until he reaches the conclusion that it 
isn't smart to be intelligent. 
Ignore such negative thinkers in your midst. 
For often the remarks made in your direction aren't so per­
sonal as you might at first think. They are merely a projection of 
the speaker's own feeling of failure and discouragement. 
Don't let negative thinkers pull you down to their level. Let 
them slide by; like the water from the proverbial duck's back. 
Cling to people who think progressively. Move upward with 
them. 
You can do it, simply by thinking right! 
A special word of caution: be careful about your source 
of advice. In most organizations you will encounter freelance 
advisors who "know the ropes" and are tremendously eager to 
clue you in. One time I overheard a freelance advisor explaining 
the facts of office life to a bright young man just starting in. Said 
the advisor: "The best way to get along here is just stay out of 
everybody's way. If they ever get to know you, all they'll do is pile 
more work on you. Be especially careful to stay away from Mr. Z. 
[the department manager}. If he thinks you haven't got enough 
to do, he'll really load you down ... " 
This freelance advisor had been with the company for almost 
thirty years and was still bottom man on the totem pole. What a 
consultant for a young fellow who wants to 'move upward in the 
business! 

--- Page 162 ---
156 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT; GO FIRST CLASS 
MAKE IT A RULETO SEEK ADVICE FROM PEOPLE 
WHO KNOW 
There's a lot of incorrect thinking that successful people are 
inaccessible. The plain truth is that they are not. As a rule, it's the 
more successful people who are the most humble and ready to 
help. Since they are sincerely interested in their work and' success, 
they are eager to see that the work lives on and that somebody 
capable succeeds them when they retire. It's the "would-be-big" 
people who are most often the most abrupt and hard to get to 
know. 
An executive made this clear: 'Tm a busy woman, but 
there's no Do Not Disturb sign on my office door. Counseling 
people is one of my key functions. We give standardized train­
ing of one kind or another to everybody in the company. But 
personal counseling, or 'tutoring,' as I like to call it, is available 
for the asking. 
"I stand ready to help the fellow who comes in here with 
either a company or a personal problem. The fellow who dis­
plays curiosity and exhibits a real desire to know more about his 
job and how it relates to other jobs is the individual I like most 
to help. 
"But," she said, "for obvious reasons, I can't spend time 
offering advice to anybody who isn't sincere in seeking it." 
Go first class when you have questions. Seeking advice from 
a failure is like consulting a quack on how to cure cancer. 
Many executives today never employ persons for key jobs with­
out first interviewing the fellow's wife. One sales executive 
explained to me, "I want to be sure the prospective salesman has 
his family behind him, a cooperative family that won't object to 

--- Page 163 ---
MAIIAGEYOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 157 
travel, irregular hours, and other inconveniences which are part 
of selling, a family that will help the salesman over those inevi­
table rough spots." 
Executives today realize that what happens on weekends 
and between 6 P.M. and 9 A.M. directly affects a person's perfor­
mance from 9 ·A.M. to 6 P.M. The person with a constructive off­
the-job life nearly always is more successful than the person who 
lives in a dull, dreary home situation. 
Let's look in on the traditional way two co-workers, John 
and Milton, spend their weekends. Let's look, too, at the ultimate 
results. 
John's psychological diet on weekends is something like this: 
Usually; one evening is spent with some carefully selected, inter­
esting friends. Another evening is generally spent out: perhaps at 
a movie, a civic or community project, or some friends' house. 
John devotes Saturday morning to Boy Scout work. Saturday 
afternoon he does errands and chores around the house. Often 
he works on some special project. Currently it's building a patio 
in the backyard. On Sundays John and his family do something 
special. One Sunday recently they climbed a mountain; another 
Sunday they visited a museum. Occasionally they drive into th~ 
nearby countryside, for John wants to buy some country prop­
erty in the not-too-distant future. 
Sunday evening is spent quietly. John usually reads a book 
and catches up on the news. 
Wrapped up, John's weekends are planned. His many 
refreshing activities keep boredom locked out. John gets plenty 
of psychological sunshine. 
Milton's psychological diet is much less well balanced than 
John's. His weekends are unplanned. Milton is usually pretty 

--- Page 164 ---
158 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 
"tired" on Friday night, but he goes through the motions of 
asking his wife, "Want to do anything tonight)" but the plan 
.dies there. Rarely do Milton and his wife entertain, and rarely 
are they invited out. Milton sleeps late on Saturday morning, 
and the rest of the day is taken up with chores of one kind or 
another. Saturday night Milton and his family usually go to a 
movie or watch TV (,What else is there to do?"). Milton spends 
most of Sunday morning in bed. Sunday afternoon they drive 
over to Bill and Mary's or Bill and Mary drive over to see them. 
(Bill and Mary are the only couple Milton and his wife visit 
regularly. ) 
Miltons entire weekend is marked by boredom. By the time 
Sunday evening rolls around, the whole family is on each other's 
nerves as a result of "cabin fever." There are no knock-down, 
drag-out fights, but' there are hours of psychological warfare. 
Milton's weekend is dull, dreary, boring. Milton gets no 
psychological sunshine. 
Now, what's the effect of these two home environments on 
. ,John and Milton? Over a period of a week or two there probably 
is no perceptible effect. But over a period of months and years 
the effect is tremendous. 
John's environmental pattern leaves him refreshed, gives 
him ideas, tunes up his thinking. He's like an athiete being fed 
steak. 
Milton's environmental pattern leave,S him psychologically 
starved. His thinking mechanism is impaired. He's like an athlete 
being fed candy and beer. 
John and Milton may be on the same level today, but there 
,will gradually be a wide gap between them in the months ahead, 
with John in the lead position. 

--- Page 165 ---
MANAGEYOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 159 
Casual observers will say; "Well, I guess John has more on 
the ball than Milton." 
But those of us who know will explain that much of the 
difference in job performance is the result of the difference in the 
mind food consumed by the two fellows. 
Every farmer in the corn belt knows that if he puts plenty . 
of fertilizer with his corn, he's going to get a bigger yield. 
Thinking too must be given additional nourishment if we want 
to get better results. 
My wife and I, along with five other couples, spent a won­
derful evening last month as guests of a department store execu­
tive and his wife. My wife and I lingered just a little longer than 
the others, so I had a chance to ask our host, whom I know well, 
a question that had been in my mind all evening. "This was really 
a wonderful evening," I said, "but I'm puzzled about one thing. I'd 
expect~d to meet mainiy other retailing executives here tonight. 
But your guests all represented different fields. There was a writer, 
a doctor, ~n engineer, an accountant, and a teacher." 
He smiled and said, "Well, we often do entertain retailing 
people. But Helen and I find it's very refreshing to mix with peo­
ple who do something else for a living. I'm afraid if we confmed 
our entertaining to people who have only interests similar to our 
. own, we'd fmd ourselves in the old, well-known rut. 
"Besides," he went on, "people are my business. Every day 
thousands of people of every occupational group imaginable 
visit our store. The more I can learn about other people-their 
ideas, interests, viewpoints-the better job I can do in giving 
them the merchandise and service they want and will buy." 
Here are a few simple "do's" to help make your social envi­
ronment first class: 

--- Page 166 ---
160 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 
1. Do circulate in new groups. Restricting your social environ­
ment to the same small group produces boredom, dullness, 
dissatisfaction; equally important, remember that your 
success-building program requires that you become an 
expert in understanding people. Trying to learn all there is 
to know about people by studying one small group is like 
trying to master mathematics by reading one short book. 
Make new friends, join new organizations, enlarge your 
social orbit. Then too, variety in people, like variety in any­
thing else, adds spice to life and gives it a broader dimen­
sion. It's good mind food. 
2. Do select friends who have views different from your own. 
In this modern age, the narrow individual hasn't much 
future. Responsibility and positions of importance gravi­
tate to the person who is able to see both sides. If you're 
a Republican, make sure you have some friends who are 
Democrats, and vice versa. Get to know people of different 
religious faiths. Associate with opposites. But just be sure 
they are persons with real potential. 
3. Do select friends who stand above petty, unimportant 
things. Folks who are more concerned with the square foot­
age of your home or the appliances you have or don't have 
than with your ideas and your conversation are inclined 
to be petty. Guard your psychological environment. Select 
friends who are interested in positive things, friends who 
really do want to see you succeed. Find friends who breathe 
encouragement into your plans and ideals. If you don't, if 

--- Page 167 ---
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 161 
you select petty thinkers as your close friends, you'll gradu­
ally develop into a petty thinker yourself. 
We're a poison-conscious nation-body poison, that is. 
Every restaurateur is on guard against fuod poisoning. Just 
a couple of cases of it, and his patrons won't come near his place. 
We've got tons of laws to protect the public against hundreds 
of body poisons. We put-or should put-poisons on the top 
shelves so the kids can't reach them. We go to any extreme to 
avoid body poison. And it's good that we do. 
But there's another typeof poison perhaps a little more 
insidious-thought poison-commonly called "gossip." Thought 
poison differs from body poison in rwo ways. It affects the mind, 
not the body, and is more subtle. The person being poisoned usu­
ally doesn't know it. 
Thought poison is subtle, but it accomplishes ''big'' things. 
It reduces the size of our thinking by forcing us to concentrate 
on petty, unimportant· things. It warps and rwists our thinking 
about people because it is based on a distortion of facts, and it 
creates a guilt feeling in us that shows through when we meet the 
person we've gossiped about. Thought poison is 0 percent right 
thinking: it is 100 percent )VYong thinking. 
And contrary to lots of opinion, women have no exclusive 
franchise on gossip. Every day many men, too, live in a partially 
poisoned environment. Every day thousands of gossip fests 
staged by men take place on such' topics as "the boss's marital 
or financial problems"; "Bill's politicking to get ahead in busi­
ness"; "the probability of John being transferred"; "the reasons 
for special favors being awarded Tom"; and "why they brought 
in that new man." Gossiping goes something like this: "Say, I just 

--- Page 168 ---
162 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 
heard ... no, why ... well, it doesn't surprise me ... he had it 
coming to him ... of course, this is confidential ... " 
Conversation is a big part of our psychological environ­
ment. Some conversation is healthy. It encourages you. It make 
you feel like you're taking a walk in the warm sunshine of a 
spring day. Some conversation makes you feel like a winner. 
But other conversation is more like walking through a poi­
sonous, radioactive cloud. It chokes you. It makes you feel ill. It 
turns you into a loser. 
Gossip is just negative conversation about people, and the 
victim of thought poison begins to think he enjoys it. He seems 
to get a form of poisoned joy from talking negatively about 
others, not knowing that to successful people he is becoming 
increasingly unlikable, and unreliable. 
One of these thought-poison addicts walked into a conversa' 
tion some friends and I were having about Benjamin Franklin. As 
soon as Mr. Killjoy learned the topic of our chat, he came through 
with choice bits about Franklin's personal life, in a negative way. 
Perhaps it's true that Franklin was a character in some ways and he 
might have made the scandal magazines had they been around in 
the eighteenth century. But the point is, Benjamin Franklin's per­
sonallife had no bearing on the discussion at hand, and I couldn't 
help being glad that we weren't discussing somebody whom we 
knew intimately. 
Talk about people? Yes, but stay on the positive side. 
Let's make one point clear: Not all conversation is gossip. 
Bull sessions, shop talk, and just 'batting the breeze" are neces­
sary at times. They serve a good purpose when they are con­
structive. You can test your proneness to be a gossiper by taking 
this test: 

--- Page 169 ---
MANAGE YOUR EIIVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 163 
1. Do I spread rumors about other people? 
2. Do I always have good things to say about others? 
3. Do I like to hear reports of a scandal? 
4. Do I judge others only on the basis of facts? 
5. Do I encourage others to bring their rumors to me? 
6. Do I precede my conv~rsations with "Don't tell anybody"? 
7. Do I keep confidential information confidential? 
8. Do I feel guilty about what I say concerning other people? 
The right answers are obvious. 
Meditate on this thought for just a moment: Taking an ax 
and chopping your neighbor'~ furniture to pieces won't make 
your furniture 'look one bit better; and using verbal axes and 
grenades on another person doesn't do one thing to make you a 
better you or me a better me. 
Go first class: that is an excellent rule to follow in everything you 
do, including the goods and services you buy. Once, to prove the 
unconditional truth of the go-first-class thinking, I asked a group 
of trainees to give one example of how they had been penny­
wise and pound-foolish. Here are some sample replies: 
"I bought a low-priced suit from an offbeat retailer. Thought 
. I got a bargain, but the suit was simply no good." 

--- Page 170 ---
164 MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST GLASS 
"My car needed a new automatic transmission. Took it to 
an alley garage that agreed to do the job for $25 less than an 
. , 
authorized deakr. The 'new'. transmission lasted 1,800 miles. 
And the garage wouldn't make it right." 
"POl' months I ate at a real greasy spoon trying to save 
money. The phice wasn't clean, the food wasn't good, 'the ser­
vice-well, you couldn't call it that-and the clientele was a 
bunch of down-at-heel-ers. One day a friend persuaded· me to 
join him for lunch at one of the best restaurants in town. He 
ordered the businessman's lunch, so I did too. I was amazed at 
what I got: good food, good service, good atmosphere, and for 
just a little more than I had been paying at the greasy spoon. I 
learned a big lesson." 
There were many other replies. One fellow reported that he 
got in trouble with the Bureau of Internal Revenue because he 
used a "bargain" accountant; another went to a cut-rate doctor 
and later learned he had received a completely wrong diagnosis. 
Others related the costs of going second class in home repairs, 
hotels, and other goods and services . 
. Of course, I've heard the argument many times 'but I 
can't afford to go fir~t class." The simplest answer is: you can­
not afford to go any other way. Certainly in the 100ig run, going 
first class actually costs you less than going second class. Then, 
too, it's better to have fewer things and have quality than to have 
many things and have junk. It's better, for example, to have one 
really good pair of shoes than to have three pairs of second-class 
shoes. 
People rate you for quality. often subconsciously perhaps. 
Develop an instinct for quality. It pays. And it costs no more, 
often costs less, than second class. 

--- Page 171 ---
MANAGE YOUR ENVIRONMENT: GO FIRST CLASS 165 
MAKE YOUR ENVIRONMENT MAKE YOU 
SUCCESSFUL 
1. Be environment-conscious. Just as body diet ,makes the 
body, mind diet makes the mind. 
2. Make your environment work for you, not against you. 
Don't let suppressive forces-the negative, you-can't-do-it 
people-make you think defeat. 
3. Don't let small-thinking people hold you back. Jealous 
people want to see you stumble. Don't give them that satis­
faction. 
4. Get your advice from successful people. Your future is 
important. Never risk it with freelance advisors who are 
living failures. 
5. Get plenty of psychological sunshine. Circulate in new 
groups. Discover new and stimulating things to do. 
6. Throw thought poison out of your environment. Avoid 
gossip. Talk about people, but stay on the positive side. 
7. Go fIrst class in everything you do. You can't afford to go 
. any other way. 

--- Page 172 ---
8 
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
CA N YO LJ RE A D fill N IlS? Reading minds is easier than you think. 
Perhaps you've never thought of it, but you read the minds of 
other people, and they read your mind, every day. 
How do we do it? We do it automatically, through attitude 
appraisalS. 
Remember the song "You Don't Need to Know the 
Language to Say You're in Love"? Bing Crosby made it famous 
some years ago. There's a whole bookful of applied psychol­
ogy packed into those simple lyrics. You don't need to know the 
language to say you're in love. Anyone who's ever been in love 
knows that. 
And you don't need to know any language to say "[ like 
you" or "[ despise you" or "[ think you're important" or "unim­
portant" or "[ envy you." You don't need to know words or to 
use words to say "[ like my job" or ''I'm bored" or "['m hungry." 
People speak without a sound. 
How we think shows through in how we act. Attitudes are 
mirrors of th~ mind. They reflect thinking. 
You can read the mind of the fellow sitting at a desk. You 
sense, by observing his expressions and mannerisms, how he 

--- Page 173 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR AlliES 167 
feels toward his job. You can read the minds of salesmen, stu­
dents, husbands, and wives; you not only can-you do. 
The expert actors-those in demand in movies and televi­
sion year after year-in a sense are not actors at all. They don't 
play their roles. Instead they lose their own identity and actually 
think and feel like the character they are playing. They've got to. 
Else they'd look like phonies and their ratings would plunge. 
Attitudes do more than show through. They "sound" 
through too. A secretary does more than identifY an office when 
she says, "Good morning, Mr. Shoemaker's office." In just five 
words one secretary says, "I like you. I'm glad you're calling. I 
think you are important. I like my job." 
But another secretary saying exactly the same words tells 
you, "You bothered me. I wish you hadn't called. I'm bored with 
my job, and I don't like people who bother me." 
We read attitudes through expressions and voice tones 
and inflections. Here's why. In the long, long history of human­
kind, a speaking language even remotely resembling what we 
use today is a very recent invention. So recent, you might say, in 
terms of the great clock of time, that we developed a language 
only this morning. For millions and millions of years, people 
got by with little more than moans and groans and grunts and 
growls. 
So for millions of years people communicated with other 
people by body and facial expressions and sounds, not words. 
And we still communicate our attitudes, our feelings toward 
people and things, the same way. Aside from direct body contact, 
body movements, facial expressions, and sound are the only ways 
we have to communicate with infants. And those young ones 
show an uncanny ability to spot the phony. 

--- Page 174 ---
168 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
Professor Erwin H. Schell, one of America's most respected 
authorities on leadership, says, "Obviously, there is something 
more than facilities and competence that makes for accomplish­
ment. I have come to believe that this linkage factor, this catalY$t, 
if you wili, can be defmed in a single word-attit1Lde. When our 
attitude is right, our abilities reach a maximum of effectiveness 
and good results inevitably follow." 
Attitudes do make the difference. Salesmen with the right 
attitude beat their quotas; students with the right attitude make 
As; right attitudes pave the way to really happy married life. 
Right attitudes make you effective in dealing with people, enable 
you to develop as a leader. Right attitudes win for you in every 
situation. 
Grow these three attitudes. Make them your allies in every­
thing you do. 
1. Grow the attitude of I'm activated. 
2. Grow the attitude of You are important. 
3. Grow the attitude of Service first. 
Now let's see how. 
Years ago, when I was a college sophomore, I enrolled 
in an American history class. I remember the class vividly, not 
because I learned much about American history but because in 
an unusual way I learned this basic plinciple of successful living: 
To activate others, you must first activate yourself. 
The history class was very large, and it was held in a fan­
shaped auditorium. The professor, who was a middle-aged fellow 

--- Page 175 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUOESYOUR ALLIES 169 
and apparently well educated, was, nevertheless, pathetically 
dull. Rather than interpret history as an alive, fascinating subject, 
the professor merely cited one dead fact after another. It was a 
frightful wonder how he could possibly make such an interesting 
subject so terribly dull. But he c1id. 
You can imagine the effect the professor's boredom had on 
the students. Talking and sleeping got so out of hand that the 
professor had two assistants patrol the aisles to break up student 
conversations and wake up those who had dozed off. 
Occasionally, the professor would stop and, shaking his fro­
ger at the .c1ass, would say, 'Tm warning you. You've got to pay 
attention to what I say. You've got to stop this talking, and that's 
all there is to it." This, of course, made little impression on his 
students, many of whom, as veterans, had gambled their lives only 
months before, had made history on islands and in bombers. 
As I sat there watching this potentially great, wonderful 
experience turn into a disgusting farce, I found myself wrestling 
with the question "Why are the students ignoring what the pro­
fessor has to say?" 
The answer came. 
The students had no interest in what the professor was say­
ing because the professor himself had no. interest. He was bored 
with history, and it showed through. To activate others, to get them 
to. be enthusiastic, you must first be enthusiastic yourself. 
Over the years I've tested this principle in hundreds of dif­
ferent situations~ It always holds true. A man who lacks enthusi­
asm never develops it in another. But a person who is enthusiastic 
soon has enthusiastic followers. 
The enthusiastic salesman need never worry about unen­
thusiastic buyers. The enthusiastic teacher need never worry 

--- Page 176 ---
170 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
about disinterested students. The activated minister need never 
be distressed by a sleepy congregation. 
Enthusiasm can make things 1,100 percent beller. TWo years ago, 
employees in a business I'm acquainted with donated $94.35 to 
the Red Cross. This year the same employees, with just about 
the same payroll, donated ahnost $1,100, an increase of 1,100 
percent. 
The drive captain who collected only $94.35 was totally 
lacking in enthusiasm. He made remarks like "I suppose it's a 
worthwhile organization"; "I've never had any direct contact with 
it"; "It's a big organization and they collect a lot fi"Om the wealthy, 
so I suppose it's not too important if you contribute"; "If you can 
make a donation, see me." This fellow did nothing to inspire any­
one to want to join the Red Cross and do it in a big way. 
Ths year's drive captain was a different sort. He had enthu­
siasm. He gave examples of case histories that showed how the 
Red Cross pitches in when disaster strikes .. He showed how the Red 
Cross depends on donations from everyone. He asked the employ­
ees to be guided in giving by how much they would be willing to 
give their neighbor if disaster should strike him. He said, "Look 
what the Red Cross has done!" Notice, he did not beg. He did 
not say, "Each of you is expected to donate XX dollars." All he did 
was to show enthusiasm about the importance of the Red Cross. 
Success just naturally followed. 
Think for a moment about a club or civic organization you 
know that is fading away. Chances are, all it needs is enthusiasm 
to bring it back to life. 
Results come in proportion to enthusiasm applied. 
Enthusiasm, is simply "This is great!" Here's why. 

--- Page 177 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 171 
Here is a three-step procedure that will help you to develop 
the power of enthusiasm. 
1. Dig into it deeper. Make this little test. Think of two things in 
which you have little or no interest-maybe cards, certain kinds 
of music, a sport. Now ask yourself, "How much do I really 
know about these things?" Odds are 100 to 1 that your answer 
is "Not much." 
I confess that for years I had absolutely no interest in mod­
ern art. It was just so many botched-up lines-until I let a friend 
who knows and loves ,!,odern art explain it to me. Really, now 
that I've dug into it, I fmd it fascinating. 
That exercise supplies on,e important key for building 
enthusiasm: To get enthusiastic, learn more about the thing you 
are not enthusiastic about. 
Chances are you are quite unenthusiastic about bumble­
bees. But if you study bumblebees, find out what good they do, 
how they relate to other bees, how they reproduce, where they 
live in winter-if you find out all you can about bumblebees, you 
will soon fmd yourself really interested in bumblebees. 
To show trainees how enthusiasm can be developed through 
the dig-into-it-deeper technique, I sometimes use a greenhouse 
example. In a deliberately casual way I ask the group, '1\re any 
of you interested in manufacturing and selling greenhouses?" 
Not once have I gotten an affinnative answer. Then I make a few 
points about greenhouses: I remind the group hmv, as our stan­
dard of living rises, people become more and more interested in 
nonnecessities. I suggest how much Mrs. America would enjoy 
growing her own orchids and orange blossoms. I point out that 
if tens of thousands of families can afford private swimming 

--- Page 178 ---
172 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR AlliES 
pools, millions could afford greenhouses because greenhouses 
are relatively inexpensive. I show them that if you could sell. a 
$600 greenhouse to only one family in fifty; you'd develop a $600 
million business in producing greenhouses, and perhaps a $250 
million industry supplying plants and seeds. 
The only difficulty with this exercise is that the group, ten 
minutes before completely cold about greenhouses, now is so 
enthusiastic they don't want to move on to the next subject! 
Use the dig-into-it-deeper technique to develop enthusi-. 
asm toward other people. Find out all you can about another 
person-what he does, his family, his background, his ideas 
and ambitions-and'you'll find your interest in and enthusiasm .. 
about him mounting. Keep digging, and you're certain to find 
some common interests. Keep digging, and you'll eventually 
discover a fascinating person. 
The dig-into-it-deeper technique works also in developing 
enthusiasm toward new places. Several years ago some young 
friends of mine decided to move from Detroit to a small town in 
mid-Florida. They sold their home, closed out their business con­
nections, said good-bye to their friends, and were gone. 
Six weeks later they were back in Detroit. The reason had 
nothing to do with employment. Rather, as they put it, "We just 
couldn't stand living in a small town. Besides, all our friends are 
in Detroit. We just had to come back." 
In later conversations with these people, I learned the real 
reason why they didn't like the small Florida city. During their 
short stay there, they had taken only a surface view of the com­
munity-its history, its plans for the future, its people. They 
moved their bodies to Florida but left their minds in Detroit. 
I've talked with dozens of executives, engineers, and sales-

--- Page 179 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 173 
men who have developed career trouble because their companies 
want to move them to another location but they don't want 
to go. "I just can't see moving to Chicago (or San Francisco or 
Atlanta or New York or Miami)" is a remark spoken many times 
a day. 
There's one way to build enthusiasm toward a new loca­
tion. Simply resolve to dig into the new community. Learn all 
you can about it. Mix with the people. Make yourself feel and 
think like a community citizen from the very first day. Do this. 
and you'll be enthusiastic about your new environment. 
Today millions of Americans invest incorporate securities. 
But there are many millions more who have no interest at all in 
the stock market. That's because they are people who have not 
familiarized themselves with what the securities market is, how 
it operates, the day-to-day romance of American business. 
To get enthusiasm about anything-people, places, things­
dig into it deeper. 
Dig into it deeper, and you'll develop enthusiasm. Put this 
principle to work next time you must do something you don't 
want to do. Put this principle to work next time you find yourself 
becoming bored. Just dig in deeper and you dig up interest. 
2. In everything you do, life it up. Enthusiasm, or lack of it, shows 
.through in everything you do and say. Life up your handshak­
ing. When you shake hands, shake. Make your handclasp say, 
"['mg/ad to know you." "I am glad to see you again." Aconserva­
tive, mouse-like handshake is worse than no handshake at all. It 
makes people think, "This guy is more dead than alive." Try to 
find a highly successful person with a conservative handshake. 
You'll have to look a long, long time. 

--- Page 180 ---
174 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR AlliES 
Life up your smiles. Smile with your eyes. Nobody likes 
an artificial, pasted-on, rubbery smile. When you smile, smile. 
Show a few teeth. Maybe your teeth aren't attractive, but that's 
really unimportant. For when you smile, people don't see your 
teeth. They see a warm, enthusiastic personality, someone they 
like. 
Life up your uthank yous." A routine, automatic uthank 
you" is almost like saying "gleep, gleep." It's just an expression. 
It says nothing. It doesn't accomplish results. Make your "thank 
you" mean uthank you very much." 
Life up your talk. Dr. James F. Bender, the noted speech 
authoritY. in his excellent book How to Talk Well, says, UIs your 
'Good morning!' really good? Are your 'Congratulations!' 
enthusiastic? Does your 'How are you?'· sound interested? 
When you make a habit of coloring your words with sincere 
feelings you'll notice a great uptake in your ability to hold 
attention." 
People go along with the fellow who believes what he says. 
Say it with life. Put vitality into your speaking. Whether you 
are talking to ·a garden club, a prospect, or your children, put 
enthusiasm behind what you say. A sermon delivered enthusiasti­
cally may be remembered for months, even years. But a sermon 
delivered without enthusiasm will be mosdyforgotten 167 hours 
before neXt Sunday rolls around. 
And when you put life in your talk, you automatically put 
more life in you. Just try this right now. Say out loud with force 
and vigor: "I feel gre~t today!" Now, don't you actually feel better 
than you did before you said it? Make yourself alive all over. 
Life it up. Be sure everything you do and say tells people, 
"That fellow is alive." "He means it." "He's going places." 

--- Page 181 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 175 
3. Broadcast good news. You and I have been in many situa­
tions when someone burst in and said: 'Tve got good news." 
Immediately this person gets 100 percent attention from every­
one present. Good news does more than get attention; good 
news pleases people. Good news develops enthusiasm. Good 
news even promotes good digestion. 
Just because there are more broadcasters of bad news than 
there are broadcasters of good news, don't be misled. No one 
ever won a friend, no one ever made money; no one ever accom­
plished anything by broadcasting bad news. 
Transmit good news to your family. Tell them the good 
that happened today. Recall the amusing, pleasant things you 
experienced and let the unpleasant things stay buried. Spread 
good news. It's pointless to pass on the bad. It only makes your 
family worry. makes them nervous. Bring home some sunlight 
every day. 
Ever notice how seldom children complain about the 
weather? They take hot weather in stride until the nega­
tive news corps educate them to be conscious of unpleas­
ant temperatures. Make it a habit always to speak favorably 
about the weather regardless of what the weather actually is. 
Complaining about the weather makes you more miserable 
and it spreads misery to others. 
Broadcast good news about how you feeL Be an "I-feel-great" 
person. Just say "I feel great" at every possible opportunity, and 
you will feel better.' By the same token, tell people, "I feel awful, 
just awful," and you will feel worse. How we feel is, in large part, 
determined by how we think we feeL Remember, too, that other 
people want to be around alive, enthusiastic people. Being around 
complainers and half-dead people is uncomfortable. 

--- Page 182 ---
176 MAKEYOUR ATTITUOES YOUR ALLIES 
Transmit good news' to the people you work with. Give 
them encouragement, compliment them at every opportnnity. 
Tell them about the positive things the company is doing. Listen 
to their problems. Be helpful. Encourage people and win their 
support. Pat them on the back for the job they're doing. Give 
them hope. Let them know you believe they can succeed, that 
you have faith in them. Practice relieving worriers. 
Make this little test regularly to keep you on the right track. 
Whenever you leave a person, ask yourself, "Does that person 
honestly feel better because he has talked with me?" This self­
training device works. Apply it when talking with employees, 
associates, your family, customers, even with casual acquain­
tances. 
A salesman friend is a real good-news broadcaster. He calls 
on his customers every month and always makes it a rule to have 
some good news to pass along. 
Examples: "I met one of your good friends last week. He 
said to tell you hello." "Since I was here last big things have hap­
pened. Over 350,000 new babies were born last month, and more 
babies mean more business for both of us." 
Usually we think of bank presidents as overly reserved, 
unemotional people who never really warm up. Not so with 
one bank president. His favorite way to answer the phone is to 
say, "Good morni1lg, it's a wonderful world. May I sell you some 
money?" Improper for a banker? Some might say so, but let me 
point out that the banker who uses this greeting is Mills Lane, Jr., 
president of the Citizens and Southern Bank, the largest in the 
entire Southeast. 
Good news gets good results. Broadcast it. 
The president of a brush-manufactnring company I visited 

--- Page 183 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 177 
recently had this maxim neatly framed on his desk facing the 
visitor's chair: "Give me a Good Word or none at all." I compli­
mented him, saying that I thought the maxim was a clever way 
to encourage people to be optimistic. 
He smiled and said, "It is an effective reminder. But from 
where I sit this is even more important." He turned the frame 
around so I could see it fi'om his side of the desk. It said, "Give 
them a Good Word or none at all." 
Broadcasting good news activates you, makes you feel bet­
ter. Broadcasting good news makes other people feel better too. 
GROW THE "YOU-ARE-IMPORTANT" ATTITUDE 
This is a fact of paramount signific~nce: Each human being, 
whether he lives in India or Indianapolis, whether he's ignorant 
or brilliant, civilized or uncivilized, young or old, has this desire: 
He wants to ftel important. 
Ponder on that. Everyone, yes, everyone-your neighbor, 
you, your wife, your boss-has a natural desire to feel he is 
:'somebody." The desire to be important is man's strongest, most 
compelling nonbiological hunger. 
Successful advertisers know that people crave prestige, 
distinction, recognition. Headlines that produce sales read like 
this: "For Smart, Young Homemakers"; "Persons with Distinctive 
Tastes Use --"; "You Want Only the Best"; "Be the Envy of 
Everyone"; "For Women Who Want to Be Envied by Women 
and Admired by Men." These headlines in effect tell people, "Buy 
this product, and you put yourself in the important class." 
SatisfYing the craving, the hunger, to be important carries 
you forward to success. It is basic equipment in your success tool 
chest. Yet (and read this sentence again before you go on) even 

--- Page 184 ---
178 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
though displaying the attitude "You are important" gets results, 
and even though it costs nothing, few persons use it. A little fill-in 
is needed here to show why. 
On the philosophical side, our religions, our laws, our 
entire culture are based on the belief of the importance of the 
individual. 
Suppose, for example, you were flying your 'own plane 
and were forced down in an isolated mountain region. As soon 
as your accident was known, a large-scale search for you would 
begin. No one would ask, "Is that fellow important?" Without 
knowing anything about you except that you are a human being, 
helicopters, other aircraft, and searching parties on foot would 
begin looking for you. And they would keep on looking for you, 
spending thousands of dollars in the process, until they found 
you or until not one trace of hope remained. 
When a little child wanders off into a woods, falls into a 
well, or gets into some other dangerous predicament, no one is 
concerned with whether or not the child comes from an "impor­
tant" family. Every effort is made to rescue the child because 
every child is important. 
It's not too wild a guess that, of all living creatures, prob­
ably not more than one in ten million is a human being. A 
person is a biological rarity. He is important in God's scheme 
of things. 
Now let's look at the practical side. When most people shifr their 
thinking from philosophical discussions to everyday situations, 
they tend to forget, unfortunately; their ivory-tower concepts of 
the importance of individuals. Tomorrow, take a good look at 
how most people exhibit an attitude that seems to say; "You are 

--- Page 185 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 179 
a nobody; you count for nothing; you mean nothing, absolutely 
nothing to l11e." 
There is a reason why the "you are unimportant" attitude 
prevails. Most folks look at another person and think, "He can't 
do anything for me. Therefore, he's not important." 
But right there is where people make a basic blunder. The 
other person, regardless of his status or his income, is important 
to you and for two giant, dollars-and-cents reasons. 
First, people do more for YOll when YOll make them feel impor­
tant. Years ago, in Detroit, I rode a certain bus to work each 
morning. The driver was an old grump. Dozens-maybe hun­
dreds-of times, I saw this driver pull away from the curb when 
a wildly waving, shouting, and running passenger was just a 
second or two from the door. Over a period of several months 
I saw this driver show special courtesy to only one passenger, 
and this passenger was shown special courtesy many times. The 
driver would wait for this passenger. 
And why? Because this passenger went out of his way 
to make the driver feel important. Every morning he greeted 
the driver with a personalized, sincere "Good morning, sir." 
Sometimes this passenger would sit near the driver and make 
little comments like "You su~e have a lot of responsibility"; "It 
must take nerves of steel to drive through traffic like this every 
day"; ''You sure keep this thing on schedule." That passenger 
made the driver feel as important as if he were piloting a 180-
passenger jet airliner. And the driver in return showed special 
courtesy to the passenger. 
It pays to make "little" people feel like big people. 
Today; in thousands of offices all over America, secretaries 
ate helping salesmen make sales or lose sales depending on how 

--- Page 186 ---
180 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
the salesman has treated them. Make someone feel important, 
and he cares about you. And when he cares about you, he does 
more for you. 
Customers will buy more from you, employees will work 
harder for you, associates will go out of their way to cooperate 
with you, your boss will do more to help you if you will only 
make these people feel important. 
It pays to make 'big" people feel even bigger. The big 
thinker always adds value to people by visualizing them at their 
best. Because he thinks big about people, he gets their best out 
of them. 
Here's the second giant reason for making others feel important: 
,When you help others foel importam, you help yourself foel important 
too. 
One of the elevator operators who carried me "up and 
down" for several months had the look of complete unimportance 
written all over. She was fIftyish, unattractive, and certainly unin­
spired in her work. It was obvious that her longing to be important 
W'lS completely unfulfilled. She was one of the millions of people 
who live for months at a time without ever being given a reason to 
believe that someone notices them or cares about them. 
One morning shortly after I became one of her regular 
"uppers and downers," I noticed that she had had her hair 
redone. It was nothing fancy. It was obviously a home-made job. 
But it had been cnt and it did look better. 
So I said, "Miss S. (Note: I had learned her name), I do like 
what you've done to your hair. It really looks fme." She blushed, 
said, "Thank you, sir," and nearly missed her next stop. She 
appreciated the compliment. 

--- Page 187 ---
MAKEYOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 181 
Next morning, 10 and behold, when I stepped into the 
elevator I heard, "Good morning, Dr. Schwartz." Not one time 
beforehad I heard this operator address anyone by name. And in 
the remaining months that I had an office in the building I never 
heard anyone called by name except me. I had made the opera­
tor feel important. I had sincerely complimented her and called 
her by name., 
I had made her feel important. Now she was repaying me 
by making me feel important. 
Let's not kid ourselves. People who do not have a deep­
down feeling of self-importance are slated for mediocrity. Again 
and again this point must be driven home: You must fie1 importa1tt 
to succeed. Helping otlters to fiel important rewi/rds you because it 
makes you fie! more important. Try it and see. Here's how to do 'it: 
1. Practice appreciation. Make it a rule to let others know you 
appreciate what they do for you. Never, never let anyone feel he 
is taken for granted. Practice appreciation with a warm, sincere 
smile. A smile lets others know you notice them and feel kindly 
toward them. 
Practice appreciation by letting others know how you 
depend on them. An earnest 'Jim, I don't know what we'd do 
without you" type of remark makes people feel necessary, and 
when they feel necessary they do increasingly better work. 
Practice appreciation with honest, personalized compli­
ments. People thrive on compliments-whether two or twenty, 
nine or ninety, a person craves praise. He wants to be assured 
that he's doing a good job, that he is important. Don't feel 
that you should hand out praise oniy for big accomplishments. 
Compliment people on little things: their appearance, the way 
they do their routine work, their ideas, their loyal efforts. Praise 

--- Page 188 ---
182 MAKEYOUR ATTITUDES YOUR AlliES 
by writing personal notes complimenting people you know on 
their achievements. Make a special phone call or a special trip to 
see them .. 
Don't waste time or mental energy trying to classifY people 
as "very important persons," "important persons," or "unimport­
ant persons." Make no exceptions. A person, whether he is garbage 
collector or company vice president, is important to yon. Treating 
someone as second·class never gets you frrst-class resnlts. 
2. Practice calling people by their names. Every year shrewd 
manufacturers sell more briefcases, pencils, Bibles, and hundreds 
of other items just by putting the buyer's name on the product. 
People like to be called by name. It gives everyone a boost to be 
addressed by name. 
Two special things you must remember. Pronounce the 
name correctly, and spell it correctly. If you mispronounce or 
misspell someone's name, that person feels that you feel he is 
unimportant . 
. And here's one special reminder: When talking with people 
you don't know well, add the appropriate title-Miss, Mister, or 
Mrs. The office boy prefers Mr: Jones to just Jones. So does your 
junior assistant. So do people at every level. These little titles help 
tremendously to make people feel important. 
3. Don't hog glory, invest it instead. Just recently I was a guest 
at an all-day sales convention. After dinner that evening the vice 
president in charge of sales for the company passed out awards 
to the two district managers, a man and a woman, whose sales 
organizations had attained the best records for the year just ended. 
Then the vice president asked those district managers to take fif­
teen mlnmes to tell the entire group how their organizations did 
so exceptionally well. 

--- Page 189 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 183 
The first district manager (who, I later learned, had been 
appointed a manager only three months before and was there­
fore only partially responsible for his organization's record) got 
up and explained how he did it. 
He conveyed the impression that his efforts and his efforts 
alone caused the sales increase. Remarks such as "When I took 
over, I did such-and-such"; "Things were in a mess but I cleared 
them up"; "It wasn't easy but I just grabbed hold of the situation 
and wouldn't let go" characterized his talk. 
As he talked, I could see the increasing resentment gather­
ing in the faces of his salesmen. They were being ignored for the 
sake of the district manager's personal glory. Their hard work, 
which was responsible for the sales increase, was completely 
unrecognized. 
Then, the second district manger got up to make her short 
talk. But this lady used an entirely different approach. First, she 
explained that the reason for her organization's success was the 
wholehearted effort of her sales force. Then she asked each one 
to stand and paid a sincere personal compliment to each for his 
or her efforts. 
Note this difference; the first manager squandered the vice 
president's praise entirely on himself. In doing so, he offended his 
own people. His sales force was demoralized. The second passed 
the praise on to her sales force, where it could do more good. This 
manager knew that praise, like money; can be invested to pay 
dividends. She knew that passing the credit on to her salespeople 
would make them work even harder next year. 
Remember, praise is powe·r. Invest the praise you receive 
from your superior. Pass praise on down to your subordinates, 
where it will encourage still greater performance. When you 

--- Page 190 ---
184 MAKE YOUR ATTITUOES YOUR AlliES 
share praise, your subordinates know you sincerely appreciate 
their value. 
Here's a daily e.xercise that pays off surprisingly well. Ask 
yourself every day, "What can I do today to make my wife and 
family happy?" 
This may seem almost too simple, but it is amazingly effec­
tive. One evening, as part of a sales training program, I was dis-
\ 
cussing "Building the Home Environment for Selling Success." 
To illustrate a point, I asked the salesmen (who were all married), 
"When was the last time, aside from Christmas, your wedding 
anniversary; or her birthday; that you surprised your wife with a 
special gill:?" 
Even I was shocked at the answers. Of the thirty-five sales­
men, only one had surprised his wife in the past month. Mauy of 
the group a~swered 'between thre~ and six months." And over a 
third said, "I can't remember." 
Imagine! And some men wonder why their wives no longer 
treat them like Mr. King with a crown! 
I wanted to impress these salesmen with the power of the 
thoughtful gift. The next evening I arranged to have a florist 
appear just before the close of the session. I introduced him and 
leveled with them: "I want each of you to discover what a little 
unexpected remembrance will do to build a better home environ­
ment. I've arranged with the florist for each of you to get a fme •. 
long-stemmed red rose for just 50 cents. Now if you don't have 50 
cents, or if you think your wife isn't worth that [they laughed], I'll 
buy the flower for her myself. All I ask is that you take the rose to 
your wife and then tomorrow evening tell us ",hat happened. 
"Don't, of course. tell her how you came to purchase this 
rose for her." 

--- Page 191 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 185 
They understood. 
Without exception, every fellow testified the next evening 
that the mere investment of 50 cents had made his wife happy. 
Do something special for your family often. It doesn't 
have to be something expensive. It's thoughtfulness that counts. 
Anything that shows that you put your family's interests first will 
do the trick. 
Get the family on your team. Give them planned attention. 
In this busy age a lot of people never seem able to fmd time for 
their families. But if we plan, we can fmdit. One company vice presi­
dent told me of this method, which he says works well for him: 
"My job carries a lot of responsibillty, and I have no choice 
but to bring quite a lot of work home every night. But I will not 
neglect my family because it's the most important thing in my 
life. It's the main reason I work as Iprd as I do. I've worked out a 
schedule that enables me to give attention to my family.as well 
as to my work. From 7:30 to 8:30 every evening I devote my time 
to my two young children. I play games with them, read them 
stories, draw, answer questions-anything they want me to do. 
After an hour with those kids of mine, they're not only satisfied, 
but I'm 100 percent fresher. At 8:30 they trot off to bed, and I 
settle down to work for t\vo hours. 
'1\.t 10:30 I quit working and spend the next hour with my 
wife. We talk about the kids, her various activities, our plans for 
the future. This hour, undisturbed by anything, is a wonderful 
way to cap off the day. 
"I also reserve Sundays for my family. The whole day is 
theirs. I find my organized program for giving my family the 
attention it deserves is good not only for them, but also good for . 
me. It gives me new energy." 

--- Page 192 ---
186 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR AlliES 
WANT TO MAKE MONEY? THEN BET THE 
PUT-SERViCE-FiRST ATTiTUDE 
It's perfectly natural-in fact, it's highly desirable-to want to 
make money and accumulate wealth. Money is power to give your 
family and yourself the standard of living they deserve. Money is 
power to help the unfortunate. Money is one of the means to liv­
ing life fully. 
Once criticized for urging people to make money, the great 
minister Russel H. Conwell, author o(Acres of Diamonds, said, 
"Money printed your Bible, money builds your churches, money 
sends. your missionaries, and money pays your preachers, and 
you would not have many of them, either, if you did not pay 
them." 
The person who says he wants to be poor usually suffers from 
a guilt complex or a feeling of inadequacy. He's like the youngster 
who feels he can't make As in school or make the football team, so 
he pretends he doesn't want to make As or play football. 
Money, then, is a desirable objective. What's puzzling about 
money is the backward approach so many people use in trying 
to make it. Everywhere you see people with a "money-first" 
attitude. Yet these same people always have little money. Why? 
Simply this: People with a money-first attitude become so money 
conscious that they forget money can't be harvested unless they 
plant the seeds that grow the money. 
And the seed of money is service. That's why "put service 
first" is an attitude that creates wealth. Put service first, and 
money takes care of itself. 
One summer, evenIng I was traveling by car through 
Cincinnati. It was time for a gas-up. I stopped at an ordinary­
looking but surprisingly busy service station. 

--- Page 193 ---
, 
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 187 ' i 
Four minutes later I knew why this particular service sta­
tion was so popular. After filling my car with gasoline, checking 
under the hood. and cleaning the outside of my windshield, the 
attendant walked around to my side of the car and said, "Pardon 
me, sir. It's been a dusty day. Let me clean the inside of your 
windshield." 
Quickly and efficiently, he did a thorough job of cleaning 
the inside of my windshield, something, not one service station 
attendant in a hundred ever does. 
This little special service did more than improve my night 
visibility (and it improved it a lot); it made me remember this sta­
tion. It so happened that I made eight ttips through Cincinnati dur­
ing the next three months. Each time, of course, I stopped at this 
station. And each time I got more service than I expected to get. 
Interesting too was the fuct that each time I stopped (once it was 4 
A,M.) there were other automobiles filling up also. In all, I probably 
purchased about 100 gallons of gasoline from this station. 
The first time I stopped the attendant could have thought 
to himself, "This guy is from out of state. Odds are twenty to one 
that he'll never be back. Why do more than give him the routine 
treatment? He's only a one-time customer." 
But the attendants in that station didn't think that way. 
They put service first, and that's why they were busy pumping 
gasoline while other stations looked almost deserted. If the gaso­
line was any better than a dozen other brands, I didn't notice it. 
And the price was competitive. 
The difference was service. And it was obvious that service 
was paying off in profits. 
When the attendant on my first visit cleaned the inside of 
my windshield. he planted a money seed. 

--- Page 194 ---
lBB MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
Put service first, and money takes care of itself-always. 
The put-service-first attitude pays off in all situations. In 
one of my first jobs I worked closely with another young fellmv, 
whom I'll call F. H. 
F. H. was like many persons you know: He was preoccupied 
with why he needed more money instead of being preoccupied 
with ways to make money. Bach week F. H. spent hours of com­
pany time working on his personal budget problems. His favorite 
topic of conversation was "['m the most underpaid man here. 
Let me tell you why." 
F. H. had the not uncommon attitude of "This is a big com­
pany. It's netting millions. It's paying a lot of people big salaries, 
so it ought to pay me more too." 
F. H. had been passed over several times for pay increases. 
Finally one day he decided that it was high time he went in there 
and demanded more money. About thirty minutes later F. H. 
was back, all heated up. His expression made it obvious that next 
month's check would look exactly like this month's check. 
Immediately F. H. began to let go. "Boy, am I mad! What 
do you suppose the old man said when I told him I wanted more 
money? He had the gall to ask me, 'Why do you believe you are 
justified in asking for an increaser 
"I gave him plenty of reasons," F. H. went on. "I told him 
I'd been passed over when others around here were getting pay 
raises. I told him my bills are getting larger and my paycheck 
isn't. And I told him that I do everything around here they ask 
me to do. 
"Can you beat that? I Heed a raise, but instead of paying me 
more, they give out raises to other guys around here who don't 
need it half as much as I do. 

--- Page 195 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 189 
'Why, the way he acted," F. H. continued, "you'd think I 
was asking for charity. All he would say is 'When your record 
shows that you deserve more money, you'll get more money.' 
"Sure, I cpuld do a better job if they paid me for it, but only 
a fool does something he isn't paid for." 
F. H. is an example of the breed that is blind to the 'now" 
of making money. His last remark sums up his mistake. In effect, 
F. H. wanted the company to pay him more and then he would 
produce more. But this is not how the system works. You don't 
get a raise on the promise of better performance; you get a raise 
only by demonstrating better performance. You can't harvest 
money unless you plant the seeds that grow money. And the seed 
of money is service. 
Put service first, and money takes care of itself. 
Consider which producers make the money from movies. 
The 'get-rich-quick producer proceeds to make a picture. Putting 
money ahead of entertainment (service), he cuts corners every­
where. He buys a poorly written script and employs second-rate 
writers to adapt it. In employing actors, arranging sets, even 
recording sound, he puts money first. This producer thinks the 
moviegoer is a sucker, someone who can't tell good from bad. 
But the get-rich-quick producer seldom does get rich quick. 
• There never is a bandwagon movement to buy anything second­
class, especially when it is given a first-class price. 
The producer who enjoys the largest profits from pictures 
puts entertainment ahead of money. Rather than chisel the 
moviegoer, he does everything possible to give people more and 
better entertainment than they expectto get. The result: people 
like the movie. It gets talked about. It gets good reviews. And it 
makes money. 

--- Page 196 ---
190 MAKE YOUR ATTITUDES YOUR ALLIES 
Again, put service first, and money takes care of itself. 
The waitress who concentrates on giving the best possible 
service needn't worry about tips; they'll be there. But her coun­
terpart who overlooks the empty coffee cups ('Why refill them? 
They don't look like tippers.") won't find any gratuities. 
The secretary who resolves to make those letters look better 
than the boss expects will do all right on future paychecks. But the 
secretary who thinks, "Why worry about a few smudges? What 
do they expect for $65 a week?" -she is stuck at $65 a week. 
The salesman who gives full service to an account need 
harbor no fears he'll lose the account. 
Here is a simple but powerful rule that will help you to 
develop the put-service-first attitude: Always give people more than 
they expect to get. Each little extra something you do for others is 
.a money seed. Volunteering to work late and get the department 
out of a tight spot is a money seed; giving customers extra ser­
vice is a money seed because it brings customers back; advancing 
a new idea that will increase efficiency is a money ·seed. 
Money seeds, of course, grow money. Plant service and 
harvest money. 
Spend some time each day answering this question: "How 
can I give more than is expected of mel" Then apply the 
answers. 
Put service first, and money takes care of itself. 
In quick recap, grow attitudes that will carry you forward 
to success. 
1. Grow the ''I'm activated" attitude. Results come in propor­
tion to the enthusiasm invested. Three things to do· to acti­
vate yourself are: 

--- Page 197 ---
MAKE YOUR ATTlTUOES YOUR ALLIES 191 
Dig into it deeper. When you find yourself unin­
terested in something, dig in and learn more 
about it. This sets off enthusiasm. 
Life up everything about you: your smile, your 
handshake, your talk, even your walk. Act 
alive. 
Broadcast good news. No' one ever accomplished 
anything positive telling bad news. 
2. Grow the "You are important" attitude. People do more for 
you when you make them feel important. Remember to do 
these things: 
Show appreciation at every opportunity. Make 
people feel important. 
Call people by name. 
3. Grow the "Service first" attitude, and watch money take 
care of itself. Make it a rule in everything you do: give 
people more than they expect to get. 

--- Page 198 ---
9 
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 
HERE IS A BASIC rule for winning success. Let's mark it in the 
mind and remember it. The rule is: Success depends ou the support 
of other people. The only hurdle between you and what you want 
to be is the support of others. 
Look at it this way: an executive depends on people to carry 
out his instructions. If they don't, the company president will fire 
the executive, not the employees. A salesman depends on people 
to buy his product. If they don't, the salesman fails. Likewise, a col­
lege dean depends on professors to carry forward his educational 
program; a politician depends on voters to elect. him; a writer 
. depends on people to read what he writes. A chain store magnate 
got to be a chain store magnate because employees accepted his 
leadership and consumers accept~d his merchandising program. 
There were times in history wlien a person could gain a 
position of authority tlirough force and hold it with force and! or 
tlireats of force. In those days a man either cooperated with the 
"leader" or risked literally lOSing his head. 
But today, remember, a person either supports you willingly 
or he doesn't support you at all. 
Now it's time to ask, "Granted, I depend on others in order 

--- Page 199 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 193 
to achieve the success [ want, but what must I do to get these 
people to support me and accept my leadership?" 
The answer, wrapped up in one phrase, is think right toward 
people. Think right towa1:d people, and they will like and support 
you. This chapter shows how. 
Thousands of times daily a scene like this takes place. A 
committee or group is in session. The purpose-to consider 
names for a promotion,a new job, a club membership, an 
honor-someone to be the new company president, the new 
supervisor, the new sales manager. A name is placed before the 
group. The chairman asks, "What is your feeling about so-and-
," so. 
Comments come forth. For some names there are positive 
remarks, such as "He's a good fellow: People there speak highly 
of him. He has a good technical background, too." 
"Mr. F.? Oh, he's a personable sort of man, very human, [ 
believe he would fit in well with our group." 
Some names draw negative, lukewarm statements. "[ think 
we should investigate that fellow carefully. He doesn't seem to 
get along too well with people." 
"[ know he has a good academic and technical background; 
[ don't question his competence. But [ am concerned about the 
acceptance he would receive. He doesn't command much respect 
from people." 
Now, here is an exceptionally important observation: In 
at least nine cases out of tell, the "likability" factor is the first thing 
mmtioned. And ill an overwhelmingly large number of cases, the "lik­
ability" factor is givm far more weight than the technical factor. 
The above holds true even in selecting scholars for univer­
sity professorships. In my own academic experience I've sat in 

--- Page 200 ---
194 THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 
on a considerable number of occasions when names for new 
faculty personnel were under question. When a name came up, 
the group would weigh most carefully thoughts such as "Will he 
fit in?" "Will students like him?" "Will he cooperate with others 
on the staff?" 
Unfair? Unacademic) No. If the fellow isn't likable, he can't 
be expected to get through to his students with maximum effec­
tiveness. 
Mark this, point well. A person is not pulled up to a higher­
level job. Rather, he is lifted up. In this day and age nobody has 
time or patience to pull another up the job ladder, degree by pain­
ful degree. The individual is chosen whose record makes him 
stand higher than the rest. 
We are lifted to higher levels by those who know us as lik­
able, personable individuals. Every friend you make lifts you just 
one notch higher. And being likable makes you lighter to lift. 
Successfol people follow a plan for liking people. Do your People 
who reach the top don't discuss much their techniques for think­
ing right toward people. But you would be surprised how many 
really big people have a clear, definite, even written plan for liking 
people. 
Consider the case of President LyndonJohnson. Long before 
he became president, Johnson, in the process of developing his 
amazing power of personal persuasion, developed his own ten­
point formula for success. His rules, which even a casual observer 
of the president can see are practiced in everything he does, are 
quoted directly: 
1. Learn to remember names. Inefficiency at this point may 
indicate that your interest is not sufficiently outgoing. 

--- Page 201 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 195 
2. Be a comfortable person so there is no strain in being with 
you. Be an old-shoe kind of individual. 
3. Acquire the quality of relaxed easy-going so that things do 
not rufl:le you .. 
4. Don't be egotistical. Guard against the impression that you 
know it all. 
5. Cultivate the quality of being interesting so people will get 
something of value from their association with you. 
6. Study to get the "scratchy" elements ont of your personal­
ity, even'those of which you may be unconscious. 
7. Sincerely attempt to heal, on an honest basis, every mis­
understanding you have had or now have. Drain off your 
grievances. 
8. Practice liking people until you learn to do so genuinely. 
9. Never miss an opportunity to say a word of congratulation 
upon anyone's achievement, or express sympathy in sor­
row or disappointment. 
10. Give spiritual strength to people, and they will give genu­
ine affection to you. 
Living these ten simple but tremendously powerful "\ike 
people" rules makes President Johnson easier to vote for, easier 

--- Page 202 ---
196 THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 
to support in Congress. Living these ten rules makes President 
Johnson easier to lift. 
Reread these rules· again. Notice that there's no get-even 
philosophy here. There's no let-the-other-fellow-come-to-me-to­
patch-up-differences. There's no I-know-it-all-other-people-are­
stupid. 
Big people, those on top in industry; the arts, sciences, and 
politics, are human, warm. They specialize in being likable. 
But don't try to buy friendship; it's not for sale. Giving gifts is a 
wonderful practice if the gift is backed up with genuine sincerity; 
a liking to give and liking for the person to whom it is given. But 
without real sincerity; the gift is often regarded as nothing more 
than a payoff or a bribe. 
Last year, just a few days before Christmas, I was in the 
office of the president of a medium-sized trucking firm. Just as 
I was about to leave, in marched a delivery man with a gift of 
liquid refi'eshment from a local tire-recapping firm. My fiiend 
was obviously provoked and, with a certain amount of chlll in his 
voice, asked the delivery man to return the gift to its sender. 
After the delivery man left, my mend hastened to explain 
to me: "Don't misunderstand. I like to give gifts and I like to get 
them." 
Then he named a number of gifts he had already received 
from business mends that Christmas. 
"But," he went on, "when the gift is just an attempt to get 
my business, an obvious bribe, I don't want it. I quit doing business 
with that firm three months ago because their work isn't what it 
should be and I don't like the employees. But their salesman keeps 
on calling. 
"What burns me," he continued, "is that last week that 

--- Page 203 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 197 
same dl---salesman was in here and had the gall to say; '1 sure 
would like to get your business back. r m going to tell Santa to be 
real good to you this year.' If I hadn't sent their booze back, the 
first thing that so-and-so would've said to me next time he's in is 
'I'll bet you enjoyed our gift, didn't youl' " 
Friendship can't be bought. And when we try; we lose In 
two ways: 
1. We waste money. 
2. We create contempt. 
Take the initiative ill building ftiendships-leaders always do. 
It's easy and natural for us to tell ourselves, "Let him make the 
first move." "Let them call us." "Let her speak first." 
It's easy; too, virtually to ignore other people. 
Yes, it's easy and natural, but it isn't right thinking toward 
people. If you follow rhe rule of letting the other person build 
the foundation for fi'iendship, you may not have many friends. 
Actually; it's a mark of real leadership to take the lead in 
getting to know people. Next time you are In' a large group, 
observe something very significant: the most important person pre;­
ent is the one person most active in introducing himself. 
It's always a big person who walks up to you, offers his 
hand, and says, "Hello, I'mJack R." Digest this observation for a 
moment, and you'll discover the reason the fellow is important 
is that he works at building friendships. 
Think right toward people. As a friend of mIne expresses it, 
"I may not be very irnpOl·tant to him, but he's important to me. 
That's why I've got to get to know him." 

--- Page 204 ---
198 THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 
Have you ever noticed how people freeze while :vaiting for 
elevators? Unless they are with someone they know, most folks 
never say anything to the person standing beside them. One day 
I resolved to do a little experimenting. 
I resolved to say something to the stranger who was wait­
ing as I was. I kept track of his reaction twenty-five consecu­
tive times. And twenty-five times I got back a positive, friendly 
response. 
Now, talking to strangers may not be very urbane, but most 
people like it nevertheless. ,And here is the big payoff: 
When you make a pleasant remark to a stranger, you make 
him feel one degree better. This makes you feel better and helps you 
relax. Every time you say something pleasant to another person, you 
compensate yoursel£ It's like warming up your automobile on a cold 
mornlng. 
Here are six ways to win friends by exercising just a 
little initiative: 
1. Introduce yourself to others at every possible opportu­
nity----'at parties, meetings, on airplanes, at work, every­
where. 
2. Be sure the other person gets your name straight. 
3. Be sure you can pronounce the other person's name the 
way he pronounces it. 
4. Write down the other person's name, and be mighty sure 
you have it spelled correctly; people have a fetish about 

--- Page 205 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 199 
the correct spelling of their own names! If possible, get his 
address and phone number, also. 
5. Drop a personal note or make a phone. call to the new 
friends you feel you want to know better. This is an impor­
tant point. Most successful people follow through on new 
fi'iends with a letter or a phone call. 
6. And last but not least, say pleasant things to strangers. It 
warms you up and gets you ready for the task ahead. 
Putting these six rules to work is really thinking right about 
people. To be sure, it is not the way the average person thinks. 
Mr. 'l\verage" never takes the initiative in making introductions. 
He waits for the other person to introduce himself first. 
Take the initiative. Be like the successful. Go out of your 
way to meet people. And don't be timid. Don't be afraid to be 
unusual. Find out who the other person is, and be sure he knows 
who you are. 
Recently an associate and I were retained to do a preliminary 
screening of an applicant for an industrial sales job. We found the 
applicant, whom we'll call Ted, to have some good qualifications. 
He was exceptionally intelligent, made a fme appearance, and 
seemed to have a lot of ambition. 
But we found something that forced us to disqualify him, 
at least temporarily.. Ted's big limitation was this: he expected 
perfection in other people. Ted was annoyed by many little 
things, like mistakes in grammar, people who were messy with 
cigarettes, people who had bad taste in clothes, and so on. 

--- Page 206 ---
200 THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 
Ted was surprised to learn this fact about himself But he was 
eager to get into higher-paying work, and he asked whether there 
was anything we could tell him to help overcome his weakness. 
We made three suggestions: 
1. Recognize the fact that no person is perfrct. Some people are 
more nearly perfect than others, but no man is absolutely 
perfect. The most human quality about human beings is 
that they make mistakes, all kinds of them. 
2. Recognize the fact that the other follow has a right to be dijJer­
ent. Never play God about anything. Never dislike people 
because their habits are different from your own or because 
they prefer different clothes, religion, parties, or automo­
biles. You don't have to approve of what another fellow 
does, but you must not dislike him for doing it. 
3. Don't be a reformer. Put a little more "live and let live" into 
your philosophy. Most people intensely dislike being told 
"you're wrong." You have a right to your own opinion, but 
sometimes it's better to keep it to yourself. 
Ted conscientiously applied these' suggestions. A few 
months later he had a fresh outlook. He now accepts people for 
what they are, neither 100 percent good nor 100 percent bad. 
"Besides," he says, "the things that used to annoy the heck 
out of me I now find amusing. It finally dawned on me what a 
dulJ world this would be if people were alJ alike and everybody 
was perfect." 

--- Page 207 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 201 
Note this simple but key fact: No person is all good and no 
person is all bad. The perfect person just doesn't exist. 
Now, if we let our thinking go uncontrolled, we can fmd 
much to dislike in almost anyone. By the same token, if we man­
age our thinking properly; if we think right toward people, we 
can find many qualities to like and admire in the same person. 
View it this way. Your mind is a mental broadcasting station. 
This broadcasting system transmits messages to you on two equally 
powerful channels: Channel P (positive) and Channel N (negative). 
Let's see how your broadcasting system works. Suppose 
that today your business superior (we'll call him Mr. Jacobs) 
called you into his office and reviewed your work with you. He 
complimented you on your work, but he also made some specific 
suggestions on how you can do it better. Tonight it's only natural 
for you to recall the incident and do some thinking about it. 
If you tune in Channel N, the announcer will be say­
ing something like this: "Watch out! Jacobs is out to get you. 
He's a crab. You don't need any of his advice. To heck with it. 
Remember what Joe told you about Jacobs, He was right. Jacobs 
wants to grind you down like he did Joe. Resist him. Next time 
he calls you in, fight back. Better still, don't wait. Tomorrow go 
in and ask him just what he really meant by his criticism ... " 
But tune in Channel P, and the announcer will say something 
along these lines: "You kuow, Mr. Jacobs is a pretty good fellow. 
Those suggestions he made to me seem pretty sound. If I put 
them to use, I can probably do a better job and position myself for 
an increase. The old boy did me a favor. Tomorrow I'll go in and 
thank him for his constructive help. Bill was right: Jacobs is a good 
man to work with ... " 

--- Page 208 ---
202 THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 
In this specific case, if you listen to Channel N, you're 
almost certain to make some bad, perhaps fatal, mistake in your 
relations with your superior. But if you are tuned to Channel P, 
you are definitely certain to benefit from your superior's sugges· 
tions and at the same time draw yourself closer to him. He will 
appreciate that visit. Try it and see. 
Bear in mind that the longer you stay tuned to either 
Channel P or Channel N, the more interested you become and 
the harder it is to switch channels .. This is true because one 
thought, positive or negative, sets off a whole chain reaction of 
similar thought. 
You may, for example, start off with such a simple minor 
negative thought as a person's accent and fmd yourself soon 
thinking negatively about such unrelated topics as his political 
and religious beliefs, the car he drives, his personal habits, his 
relationship with his wife, even the way he combs his hair. And 
thinking this way surely won't get you where you want to go. 
You own it, so manage your thought broadcasting station. 
When your thoughts turn to people, make Channel P your lis­
tening habit. 
If Channel N cuts in, say stop. Then switch channels. To 
make the switch, all you must do is think of one positive qual­
ity about the individual. In true chain reaction style, this one 
thought will lead to another and another. And you will be glad. 
When you are alone, you and only you can decide whether 
you will listen to Channel P or Channel N. But when you are 
talking with someone else, that person has a measure of control 
over how you think. 
We must remember that most people do not understand 

--- Page 209 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 203 
the concepts of thinking right toward people. So it's a very com­
mon experience for people to come rushing to you, just aching 
to say something negative about a person you both know: a 
co-worker wants to tell you about the objectionable qualities of 
another employee; a neighbor wants to let you know the domes­
tic problems of another neighbor; or' a customer wants to item­
ize the faults of his competitor, whom you will call on next. 
Thoughts breed like thoughts. There is real danger that if ' 
you listen to negative comments about another person, you too 
will go negative toward that person. In fact, if you are not on 
guard, you may actually find yourself adding fuel to the fire with 
"Yes, and that's not all. Did you hear ... " type of comment .. 
These things backfire, boomerang. 
There are two ways to prevent others from switching us 
from Channel P to Channel N. One way is to switch topics as 
quickly and quietly as possible with some remark like "Pardon 
me, John, but while I think of it, I've been meaning to ask 
you ... " A second way is to excuse yourself with a "Sorry; John, 
I'm late now ... " or ''I've a deadline to meet. Will you excuse 
me?" 
Make a forceful promise to yourself. Refuse to let others 
prejudice your thinking. Stay tuned to Channel P. 
Once you've mastered the technique of thinking only good 
thoughts about people, greater success is guaranteed. Let me tell 
you what an unusually successful insurance salesman told me 
about how thinking good thoughts about people pays off for 
him. 
"When I first got in the insurance business," he began, "the 
going was tough, believe me. At first it seemed there were about 

--- Page 210 ---
204' THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 
as many competing agents as there were prospects. And I soon 
learned what all insurance men knO\V, that nine prospects out of 
ten firmly believe they don't need any more insurance. 
''I'm doing well. Butlet me tell you, it's not because I know a 
lot about the teclmical side of insurance. That's important, don't 
misunderstand me, but there are men trying to sell iusurance 
who know policies and contracts better than l. In fact, I know 
one man who wrote a book about insurance, but he couldn't sell 
a policy to a man who knew he had only five days to live. 
"My success," he continued, "is based on one thing. I like, 
really like the guy I'm selling. Let me say again, I really like him. 
Some of my fellow salesmen try to pretend they like the other 
fellow, but this won't work. You can't even fool a dog. Your 
mannerisms, eyes, facial expressions, all spell p-h-o-n-y when 
you pretend. 
"Now, when I'm gathering information about a prospect, I 
do what every other agent does. I get his age, where he works, 
how much he makes, how many kids he's got, and so on. 
"But I also get something .else which most salesmen never 
search for-that is, some sound reasons why I can like the pros­
pect. Maybe the job he's doing will supply the reason, or perhaps 
I can fmd it someplace in his past record. But I fmd some good 
reasons to like him. 
"Then, whenever my attention is focused on the prospect, I 
review the reasons why I like him. I build a likable image of the 
prospect before I say one word to him about insurance. 
"This little technique works. Because I like him, he sooner 
or later likes me. Pretty soon, instead of sittrng across the table 
from him, I'm on the same side with him, and we're working out 

--- Page 211 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 205 
his insurance plan together. He trusts and believes in my judg­
ment because I am a friend. 
"Now, people don't always accept me right off the bat, but 
I've found that so long as I continue to like a fellmv, he'll come 
around, and we can get down to business. 
'Just last week," my friend went on, "I was making the 
third call on a difficult prospect. He met me at the door, and 
before I could even say 'Good evening: he proceeded to give 
me hell. He went on and on, not even stopping for a breath until 
he had run down and fmished with 'And don't ever come back 
here again: 
"After he had said that, I just stood there looking into his 
eyes for about five seconds, and then said softly and with genuine 
sincerity; because I meant it, 'But Mr. S., I'm calling tonight as 
your friend: 
"Yesterday he bought a $250,000 endowment policy."" 
Sol Polk is popularly called the appliance king of Chicago. 
Starting with nothing, Sol Polk now sells millions of dollars' 
worth of appliances in a year in metropolitan Chicago. 
Sol Polk credits a lot of his success to his attitude toward 
shoppers. "Customers," says Mr. Polk, "should be treated like 
they are guests in my home." 
Isn't that thinking toward people? And isn't it about the sim­
plest success formula one can put to work? Just treat customers 
like guests in your home. 
This teclmique works outside the store too. Substitute the 
word employees for customers so that it reads "employees should 
be treatecilikeguests in my home." Give first-class treatment to 

--- Page 212 ---
206 THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 
your employees, and you get first-class cooperation, first-class 
output. Th!ill< first class about everyone around you, and you'll 
receive first-class results in return. 
One of the reviewers of an early version of this book is 
a close personal friend who owns his own business manage­
ment consulting firm. When he read the above illustration, he 
commented, "That's the positive result of liking and respecting 
people. Let me give you a personal experience of a friend of 
mine which shows what happens if you don't like and admire 
people." 
His experience has a big point. Here it is! 
"My firm obtained a contract to provide consulting services 
to a relatively small soft drink bottling concern. The contract was 
substantial. The client had little formal education. His business 
was in bad shape, and in recent years he had made some very 
costly mistakes. 
"Three days after we had got the contract, an associate and 
I were driving out to his plant, which was about forty-five min­
utes from our offices. To this day I don't know how it started, 
but somehow we began taiking about the negarive. qualities of 
our client. 
"Before we realized it, we were taiking about how his own 
stupidity had brought about the mess he was in, instead of dis­
cussing how we could best approach solving his problems. 
"I remember one remark I made which I thought particu­
larly clever-'The only thing holding up Mr. F. is fat: My associ­
ate laughed and came up with an equally choice observation: 
. :And that son of his. Junior must be all of thirty-five but the 
only qualification he has for the job he's holding is he speaks 
English.' 

--- Page 213 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 207 
"The whole drive out, we talked about nothing else bul' 
what a weak-minded numbskull we had as a client. 
"Well, the conference that afternoon was cold. Looking 
back, I think our client sensed somehow the way we felt toward 
him. He must have thought: 'These fellows think I'm stupid or 
something, and all they're going to do for my money is give, me 
some smooth-sounding talk.' 
"Two days later I got a two-sentence letter £i'om this client. 
It said, 'I've decided to cancel our contract for your consulting ser­
vices. If there is a charge for your services to date, please bill me.' 
"Printing ourselves with negative thoughts for only forty 
minutes cost us a contract. What made it even more painful 
was learning about a month later that this former client had 
contracted with an out-of-town firm for the professional assis­
tance he needed. 
"We would never have lost him had we concentrated on his 
many fme qualities. And he has them. Most people do." 
Here's how you can have some fun and discover a basic 
success principle at the same time. For the next two days listen 
in on as many conversations as you can. Note two things: which 
person in the conversation does the most talking and which per­
son is the more successful. 
Hundreds of my own little experiments have revealed this: The 
person who does the most talking and the person who is the most succes~tl 
are rarely the same person. Almost without exception, the more suc­
cessful the person, the more he practices conversatiOil ge>terosity, that 
is, he encourages the other person to talk about himself, his views, 
his accomplishments, his family, his job, his problems. 
Conversation generosity paves the way to greater success in 
two important ways: 

--- Page 214 ---
208 THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 
1. Conversation generosity wins friends. 
2. Conversation generosity helps you learn more about peo­
ple. 
Remember this: the average person would rather talk about 
himself than anything else in this world. When yon give him the 
chance, he llkes you for it. Conversation generosity is the easiest, 
simplest, and surest way there is ro win a fi-iend. 
The second benefit of conversation generosity, learning 
more abour other people, is important, too. As we said in Chapter 
1, people are what we study in our success lab. The more we can 
learn about them, their thought processes, their strong and weak 
points, why they do what and as they do, the better equipped we 
are to influence them effectively, in the way that we want .. 
Let me illustrate. 
A large New York advertising agency, llke all advertising 
agencies, specializes of course in telling the public why it should 
buy the products it advertises. But this agency does something 
else, too. It requires its copywriters to spend one week each year 
behind counters so they can listen to what people say about the 
products they promote .. Listening provides the clues these copy­
writers need to write better, more effective ads. 
Many progressive businesses conduct so-called terminal 
interviews with employees who are leaving. The reason is not to 
sell the employees on staying with the company but to find out 
why he is quitting. Then the company can bring about improve­
ments in its employee relations. Listening pays off. 
Listening pays off for the salesman, too. Often people think 
of a good salesman as a "good talker" or a "fast talker." Sales 

--- Page 215 ---
THItlK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 209 
managers, howevel~ are not as impressed by a good talker as they 
are by a good listener, a fellow who can ask questions and get 
desired answers. 
Don't be a conversation hog. Listen, win friends, and learn. 
Courtesy practiced in. every relationship with another 
person is the finest tranquilizer you can use. No commercial 
preparation is one tenth as effective in relaxing you as doing little 
things for other people. Thinking right toward people removes 
frustrations and stress. When you boil it all down, the big cause 
of stress is negative feelings toward other people. So think posi­
tive toward people and discover h"w wonderful, really wonder­
ful this world is. 
The real test for thinking right toward people comes when 
things don't go exactly the way we want. How do you think 
when you're passed up for a promotion? Or when you fail to win 
an office in a club you belong to? 01' when you're criticized for 
the job you've done? Remember this: how you think when you lose 
determines how long it will be until you win. 
The answer for tltinking right toward people when things 
don't go exactly our way comes from Benjamin Fairless, one of 
the century's most outstanding persons. Mr. Fairless, who rose 
from very modest circumstances to become chief executive of 
the United States Steel Corpor~tion, said this (quoted in Lijf 
magazine, October 15, 1956): 
"It depends on how you look at things. For example, I 
never had a teacher I hated. Naturally I was disciplined just like 
every other pupil, but I always figured it was my fault that the 
discipline was necessary. I have also liked every boss I ever had. 
I always tried to please him and do more than he expected if I 
possibly could, never less. 

--- Page 216 ---
210 THINK RIGHTTOWARO PEOPLE 
"I have had some disappointments, times when I greatly 
wanted a promotion and somebody else got it. But I never fig· 
ured that I was the victim of 'office politics' or prejudice or bad 
judgment on the boss's part. Instead of sulking or quitting in a 
huff, I reasoned things out. Obviously the other fellow deserved 
the promotion more than I did. What could I do to make myself 
deserving of the next opportunity? At the same time I never got 
angry with myself for losing and never wasted any time berating 
myself." 
Remember Benjamin Fairless when things go wrong. Just 
do two things: 
1. Ask yourself, "What can I do to make myself more deserv· 
ing of the next opportunity?" 
2. Don't waste time and energy being discouraged. Don't 
berate yourself. Plan to win next time. 
IN A CAPSULE, PUT THESE PRINCIPLES TO WORK 
1. Make yourself lighter to lift. Be likable. Practice being the 
kind of person people like. This wins their support and puts 
fuel in your success-building program. 
2. Take the initiative in building friendships. Introduce your­
self to others at every opportunity. Make sure you get the 
other person's name straight, and make certain he gets 
your name straight too. Drop a personal note to your new 
friends you want to get to know better. 

--- Page 217 ---
THINK RIGHTTOWARD PEOPLE 211 
3. Accept human differences and limitations. Don't expect 
anyone to be perfect. Remember, the other person has a 
right to be different. And don't be a reformer. 
4. TUne it1. Channel P, the Good Thoughts Station. Find quali­
ties to like and admire in a person, not things to dislike. 
And don't let others prejudice your thinking about a third 
person. Think positive thoughts towards people-and get 
positive results. 
5. Practice conversation generosity. Be like successful people. 
Encourage others to talk. Let the other person talk to you 
about his views, his opinions, his accomplishments. 
6. Practice courtesy all the time. It makes other people feel 
better. It makes yot! feel better too. 
7. Don't blame others when you receive a setback. Remember, 
how you think when you lose determines how long it will 
be until you win. 

--- Page 218 ---
10 
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
HEHE'S SOMETHING LEADERS IN every field agree on: There is a 
shortage of top-flight, expertly qualified persons to fill key posi­
tions, There really is, as the saying goes, plenty of room at the 
top. As one executive explained, there are many almost-qualified 
people, but there is one success ingredient often missing. That is 
the ability to get things'done, to get results. 
Every big job-whether it be operating a business, high­
level selling, in science, the military; or the government-requires 
a man who thinks action. Principal executives, looking for a key 
person, demand answers to questions like "Will he do the job?" 
"Will he follow through?" "Is he a selfstarter?" "Can he get results, 
or is he just a talker?" 
All these questions have one aim: to find out if the fellow 
is a man of action. 
Excellent ideas are not enough. An only fair idea acted 
upon, and developed, is 100 percent better than a terrific idea 
that dies because it isn't followed up, 
The great self-made merchant John Wanamaker often said, 
"Nothing comes merely by thinking about it." 

--- Page 219 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 213 
Think of it. Everything we have in this world, from satel­
lites to skyscrapers to baby food, is just an idea acted upon. 
As you study people-both the' successful and the just aver­
age--you find they fall into two classes. The successful are active; 
we'll call them acttvationists. The just average, the mediocre, the 
unsuccessful are passive. We'll call them passivationists. 
We can discover a success principle by studying both 
groups. Mr. Activationist is a doer. He takes action, gets things 
done, follows through on ideas and plans. Mr. Passivationist is 
a "don'ter." He postpones doing things until he has proved he 
shouldn't or can't do them or until it's too late. 
The difference between Mr. Activationist and Mr. 
Passivationist shows through in. countless little ways. Mr. 
Activationist plans a vacation. He takes it. Mr. Passivationist 
plans a vacation. But he postpones it until "next" year. Mr. A. 
decides he should attend church regularly. He does. Mr. P thinks 
it's a good idea to go to church regularly too, but he finds ways 
to postpone acquiring this new habit. Mr. A. feels that he should 
drop a note to someone he knows to congratulate him on some 
achievement. He writes the note. Under the same circumstances, 
Mr. P. fmds a good reason to put off writing the note and it never 
gets written. 
The difference shows up in big things too. Mr. A. wants to 
go into business for himself. He does. Mr. P. also wants to go into 
business for himself, but he discovers just in the nick of time a 
"good" reason why he had better not. Mr. A., age forty. decides 
he wants to take up a new line of work. He does. The same idea 
occurs to Mr. P., but he debates himself out of doing anything 
about it. 

--- Page 220 ---
214 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
The difference between Messrs. Activationist and Passiva­
tionist shows through in all forms of behavior. Mr. A. gets the 
things done he wants done, and as by-products he gains confi-
-dence, a feeling of inner security; self-reliance, and more income. 
Mr. P. doesn't get the things done he wants done because he won't 
act. As by-products he loses confidence in himself, destroys his self. 
reliance, lives in mediocrity. 
Mr. Activationist does. Mr. Passivationist is going to do but 
doesn't. 
Everyone wants to be an activationist. So let's get the action 
habit. 
A lot of passivationists got that way because they insisted 
on waiting until everything was 100 percent favorable before 
they took action. Perfection is highly desirable. But nothing man­
made or man-designed is, or can be, absolutely perfect. So to 
wait for the perfect set of conditions is to wait forever. 
Below are three case histories that show how three persons 
reacted to '~conditions." 
CASE NO.1: WHY G. N. HASN'T MARRIED 
Mr. G. N. is now in his late thirties, is well educated, works as an 
accountant, and lives alone in Chicago. G. N.'s big desire is to get 
married. He wants love, companionship, a home, children, the 
works. G. N. has been close to marriage; once he was only one 
day away. But each time he has been near marriage, he discov­
ers something wrong with the girl he's about to marry. Oust in 
time, before I made an awful mistake.") 
One instance stands out: nvo years ago, G. N. thought he 
finally had met just the right girl. She was attractive, pleasant, 
intelligent. But G. N. had to be absolutely sure that marriage 

--- Page 221 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 215 
was the right thing. As they were discussing marriage plans 
one evening, the future Mrs. G. N. made a few remarks that 
bothered G. N. 
So, to make certain he was marrying the right girl, G. N. 
drew up a four-page document of stipulations she was to agree 
to before they got married. The document, neatly typed and 
looking very legal, covered every segment of living G. N. could 
think of. There was one section on religion: what church they 
would go to, how often they would attend, how ,much they 
would donate. Another section covered children: how many and 
when. 
In detail, G. N. outlined the kind of friends they would 
have, his future wife's employment status, where they would 
live, how their income would be spent. To fInish the document, 
G. N. devoted half a page to listing specifIc habits the girl must 
break or must acquire. This covered such habits as smoking, 
drinking, makeup, entertainment, and so on. 
When G. N.,'s prospective bride reviewed his ultimatum, 
she did what you would expect. She sent it back with a note say­
ing, "The usual marriage clause, 'for better or for-worse,' is good 
enough for everyone else and it's good enough for me. The whole 
thing is off." , 
As G. N. was relating his experience to me, he said wor-
riedly, "Now, what was so wrong in writing out this agreement? 
After all, marriage is a big step. You can't be too careful." 
But G. N. was. wrong. You call be too careful, too cautious, 
not only in planning a marriage but in planning anything in the 
world where things get done. The standards can be too high. 
G. N:s approach to marriage was very much like his approach to 
his work, his savings, his friendships, everything else. 

--- Page 222 ---
216 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
The test of a successful person is not an ability to eliminate 
all problems before they arise, but to meet and work out difficul­
ties when they do arise. We must be willing to make an intel­
ligent compromise with perfection lest we wait forever before 
taking action. It's still goqd advice to cross bridges as we come 
to them. 
CASE NO.2: WHY J. M. LIVES IN A NEW HOME 
In every big decision, the mind battles with itself-to act 01' not 
to act, to do or not to do. Here's how one young fellow elected 
to act and reaped big rewards. 
J. M.'s situation is similar to that of a miillon other young 
men. He is in his twenties, has a wife and child, and still has only 
a modest income. 
Mr. and Mrs. J. M. lived in a small apartment. Both wanted 
a new home. They wanted the advantage of more space, cleaner 
surroundings, a place for the youngster to play, and a chance to 
build up equity in their own property. 
But there was a hitch to buying a new home-the down 
payment. One day as J. M. was writing next month's rent check 
he became very disgusted with himself. He observed that the rent 
payment was as much as monthly payments on a new home. 
J. M. called his wife and said, "How would you like to buy a 
new home next week)" "What's got into you)" she asked. "Why 
make jokes? You know we can't. We haven't even got the money 
for the down payment." 
But J. M. was determined. "There are hundreds of thou­
sands of couples like Us who are going to buy. a new home 'some­
day,' but only about half of them ever do. Somethlng always 

--- Page 223 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 217 
comes up to stop them. We're going to buy a horne. I don't know 
yet how we'll raise the down payment, but we will." 
Well, the next week they found a house they both liked, 
quite unpretentious .but nice, for $1,200 down. Now the obstacle 
was to fInd a way to raise $1,200.]. M. knew he couldn't borrow 
it through the usual channels, for this would encumber his credit 
so that he couldn't get a mortgage for the sale price. 
Where there's a will there's always a way. Suddenly, J. M. 
got a brainstorm: Why not contact the builder and work out a 
private loan arrangement for $1,200? This]. M. did. At fIrst, the 
builder was cold to the idea, but]. M. persisted. Finally, it was 
agreed. The builder would, in effect, advance]. M. the $1,200, to 
be repaid at $100 a month plus inrerest. 
Now all]. M. had to do was to "fmd" $100 a month. Mr. 
and Mrs. J. M. sharpened their pencils and figured out a way to 
cut expenditures $25 a month. But that still left $75, which]. M. 
would have to raise each month. 
Then J. M. got another idea. The next morning he went in 
to see his boss. He explained to his employer what he was doing. 
His boss was glad to learn that]. M. was going to buy a new 
horne. 
Then]. M. said, "Look, Mr. T., to work this deal out, I've 
got to earn at least $75 more each month. Now, I know," ]. M. 
continued, "you'll give me a raise when you feel that I deserve it. 
What I want now is just a chance to earn more money. There are 
some things around here that could best be done on weekends. 
Will you make it possible for me to work then?" 
The employer was impressed with]. M.'s sincerity and 
ambition. He proposed a way for]. M. to work ten extra hours 

--- Page 224 ---
218 GETTHEACTIOH HABIT 
each weekend, and Mr. and Mrs. J. M. moved into their new 
home. 
1. The resolution. to take action ignited J. M.'s mind to think 
of ways to accomplish his goal. 
2. J. M. gained tremendously in new confidence. It will be 
much easier for him to take action in other major situa­
tions. 
3. J. M. provided his wife and child the liying standard they 
deserved. Had he waited, postponed buying the house until 
conditions were perfect, there is a real possibility they never 
would have owned a home of their own. 
CASE NO.3: C. D. WANTED TO START HIS OWN 
BUSINESS, BLiT ... 
Mr. C. D. represents another case of what happens to big ideas 
when one waits until conditions are perfect before taking action 
on those ideas. 
Shortly after World War II, C. D. got a job with the Customs 
Division of the U.S. Post Office Department. He liked his work, 
but after five years he became dissatisfied with the confinement, 
regnlar hours, low pay; and the seniority system with its relatively 
narrow chances for advancement. 
Then he got an idea. He had learned a great deal about 
what it takes to be a successful'importer. Why not set himself up 
in the business of importing low-cost gift items and toys? C. D. 
knew many successful importers who didn't have his knowledge 
of the ins and outs of this business. 

--- Page 225 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 219 
It's been ten years now since C. D. decided he wanted to 
go into business for himself. But.today, he's still working for the 
Customs Office. 
Why? Well, every time C. D. was just about ready to cut 
loose on his own, something happened that stopped him from 
taking action. Lack of money, economic recession, new baby, 
need for temporary security, trade restrictions, and more excuses 
all served as reasons for waiting, for postporung. 
The real truth is that C. D. let himself develop into a pas­
sivationist. He wanted conditions to be perfect before he took 
action. Since conditions were never perfect, C. D. never took 
action. 
Here are two things to do to help you avoid the costly mis­
take of ,,'aiting until conditions are perfect before you act: 
1. Expect future obstacles and difficulties. Every venture pres­
ents risks, problems, and uncertainties. Let's suppose you 
wanted to dtive your car from Chicago to Los Angeles,but 
you insisted on waiting until you had absolute assurance 
that there would be no detours, no motor trouble, no bad 
weather, no drunken dtivers, no risk of any kind. When 
would you start? Never! In planning your trip to Los Angeles 
it makes' sense to map your route, check your car, in other 
ways to eliminate as much lisk as possible before you start. 
But you can't eliminate all risks. 
2. Meet problems and obstacles as they arise. The test of a 
successful person is not the ability to eliminate all problems 
before he takes action, but rather the ability to fmd solu­
tions to difficulties when he encounters them. In business, 

--- Page 226 ---
220 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
marriage, or in any activity, cross bridges when you come 
to them. 
We can't buy an insurance policy against all problems. 
Make up your mind to do something about your ideas. Five 
or six years ago a very capable professor told me of his plans for 
wri\ing a book, a biography of a controversial personality of a 
few decades ago. His ideas were more than interesting; they were 
alive, fascinating. The professor knew what he wanted to say; and 
he had the skill and energy to say it. The project was destined to 
reward him with much inner satisfaction, prestige, and money. 
Last spring I saw my friend again, and I innocently asked 
him whether the book was about fInished. (This was a blunder; 
it opened up an old wound.) 
No, he hadn't written the book. He struggled with himself 
for a moment as if he were debating with himself whether to 
explain why. Finally he explained that he had been too busy; he 
had more "responsibilities" and just couldn't get to it. 
In reality; what the professor had done was to bury the idea 
deep in his mental graveyard. He let his mind grow negative 
thoughts. He visualized the tremendous work and sacrifIces that 
would be involved. He sawall sorts of reasons why the project 
would fail. 
Ideas are important. Let's make no mistake about that. We 
must have ideas to create and improve anything. Success shuns 
the man who lacks ideas. 
But let's make no mistakes about this point either. Ideas in 
themselves are not enough. That idea for getting more business, 
for simplifYing work procedures, is of value only when it is acted 
upon. 

--- Page 227 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 221 
Every day thousands of people bury good ideas because 
they are afraid to act on them. 
And aftetward, the ghosts of those ideas come back to 
haunt them. 
Put these two thoughts deep in your mind. First, give your 
ideas value by acting on them. Regardless of how good the idea, 
unless you do something with it, you gain nothing. 
Second, act on your ideas and gain mind tranquillity. 
Someone once said that the saddest word~ of tongoe or pen are 
these: it might have been. Every day you hear someone saying 
something like "Had I gone into business seven years ago, I'd 
sure be sitting pretty now." .or "I had a hunch it would work out 
like that. I wish I had done something about it." A good idea if 
not acted upon produces terrible psychological pain. But a good 
idea acted upon brings enormous mental satisfuction. 
Got a good idea? Then do something about it. 
Use action to cure fear and gain confidence. Here's something 
to remember. Action feeds and strengthens confidence; inaction 
in all forms feeds fear. To fight fear, act. To increase fear-wait, 
put off, postpone. 
Once I heard a young paratrooper instructor explaill, "The 
jump really isn't so bad. It's the waiting to jump that gets a fellow. 
On the trip to the jump site I always try to make the time pass 
quickly for the men. It's happened more than once that a trainee 
thought too much about what may happen and panicked. If we 
can't get him to jump the next trip, he's through as a paratrooper. 
Instead of gaining confidence, the longer he postpones the jump, 
the more scared he gets." 
Waiting even makes the experts nervous. Time magazine 
reported that Edward R. Murrow, the nation's top newscaster, 

--- Page 228 ---
222 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
perspires and is on edge just before he telecasts. But once he's in 
action, fear disappears. Many veteran actors experience the same 
sensation. They agree that the only cure for stage fright is action. 
Getting right out there before the audience is the cure for dread, 
worry, fear. 
Action cures fear. One evening ,,;'e were visiting in a friend's 
home when their five-year-old boy; who had been put to bed 
thirty minutes before, cried out. The youngster had been over­
stimulated by a science fiction mm and was afraid the little green 
monsters were going to enter his room and kidnap him. I was 
intrigued by the way the boy's father relieved the lad's worry. 
He didn't say; "Don't worry, son, nothing is going to get you. Go 
back to sleep." Instead he took positive action. He made quite a 
show for the boy by inspecting the windows to be sure they were 
tight. Then he picked up one of the boy's plastic guns and put 
it on a table beside his bed and said, "Billy; here's a gun for you 
just in case." The little fellow had a look of complete relief. Four 
minutes later he was fast asleep. 
Many physicians give neutral, harmless "medication" to 
people who insist they've got to have something to make them 
sleep. To lots of folks the act of swallowing a pill, even though 
(unknown to them) the pill has no medication, makes them feel 
better. 
It's perfectly natural to experience fear in one of many 
forms. But the usual methods of combating it simply don't work. 
I've been with many salesmen who tried to cure fear, which 
creeps up on even the most experienced of them at times, by 
going around the block a few times or drinking extra coffee. But 
these things don't get results: The way to co~bat that kind of 
fear-yes, any kind of fear~yes, any kind of fear-is action. 

--- Page 229 ---
BETTHE ACTION HABIT 223 
Dread making a certain phone calll Make it, and dread di~­
appears. Put it off, and it will get harder and harder to make. 
Dread going to a doctor for a checkup? Go, and your worry 
vanishes. Chances are nothing serious is wrong with you, and if 
there is, you know where you stand. Put off that checkup, and 
you feed your fear until it may grow so strong that you actually 
are sick. 
Dread discussing a problem with your superior? Discuss it, 
and discover how those worries are conquered. 
Build c01ifidence. Destroy fear through action. 
START YOUR MENTAL ENGINE-MECHANICALLY 
An aspiring young writer who wasn't experiencing success made 
this confession: "My trouble is, whole days and weeks pass that 1 
can't get a thing written. 
"You see," he remarked, "Writing is creative. You've got to 
be inspired. Your spirit must move you." 
True, writing is creative, but here's how another creative 
man, also a writer, explained his "secret" for producing quantities 
of successful material. 
"1 use a 'mind force' technique," he began. "I've got dead­
lines to meet, and 1 can't wait for my spirit to move me. I've got 
to move my spirit. Here's how my method works. 1 make myself 
sit down at my desk. Then 1 pick up a pencil and go through 
mechanical motions of writing. 1 put down anything. 1 doodle. 1 
get my fmgers and arm in motion, and sooner 01' later, without 
my being conscious ont, my mind gets on the right track. 
"Sometimes, of course, 1 get ideas out of the blue when 
I'm not trying to write," he went on, 'but these are just bonuses. 
Most of the· good ideas come from just getting to work." 

--- Page 230 ---
224 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
Action must precede action. That's a law of nature. 
Nothing starts itself. not even the dbzens of mechanical gadgets 
we use daily. 
Your home is heated automatically, but you must select 
(take action) the temperature you want. Your car shifts gears 
automatically only after you have set the right lever. The same 
principle applies to mind action. You get your mind in gear to 
make it prod~ce for you. 
A young branch sales manager for a door-to-door sales orga­
nization explained how he trained his sales force the "mechanical 
way" to start each day earlier and more successfully. 
"There's a tremendous resistance to the door-to-door sales­
man, as anyone who has ever sold house to house knows," he 
commented. 'i\nd it's hard, even for the veteran salesman, to 
make that first call in the morning. He knows the odds are pretty 
good that he'll get some pretty rough treatment before the day is 
over. So it's natural for him to put off getting started in the morn­
ing. He'll drink a couple of extra cups of coffee, maybe cruise 
around the neighborhood awhile 01' do a dozen little things to 
postpone that first call. 
"I train e~ch new man this way. I explain to him that the only 
way to start is to start. Don't deliberate. Don't postpone getting 
started. Do this: Just park your car. Get your sample case. Walk 
to the door. Ring the bell. Smile. Say 'Good morning: and make 
your presentation, all mechanically, without a lot of conscious 
thought. Start making calls this way and you break the ice. By the 
second or third call, your mind is sharp and your presentations 
become effective." 
A humorist once said the most difficult problem in life was 
getting out of a warm bed into a cold room. And he had a point. 

--- Page 231 ---
GET THE ACTION HABIT 225 
The longer you lie there and think how unpleasant it will be 
to get up, the more difficult it becomes. Even in such a simple 
operation as this, mechanical action, just throwing off the covers 
and putting your feet on the floor, defeats dread. 
The point is clear. People who get things done in this world 
don't wait for the spirit to move them; they move the spirit. 
Try these two exercises: 
1. Use the mechanical way to accomplish simple but some­
times unpleasant business and household chores. Rather 
than think about the unpleasant features of the task, jump 
right in and get going without a lot of deliberation. 
Perhaps the most unpleasant household task to most 
women is washing dishes. My mother is no exception. But she 
has mastered a mechanical approach to dispensing with this task 
quickly, so she can return to things she likes to do. 
As she leaves the table, she always mechanically picks up 
several dishes and, without thinking about the task ahead, just 
gets started. In just a few minutes she is through. Doesn't this 
beat stacking dishes and dreading the unpleasant inevitable? 
Do this today: Pick the one thing you like to do least .. Then, 
without letting yourself deliberate on or dread the task, do it. 
That's the most efficient way to handle chores. 
2. Next, use the mechanical way to create ideas, map out 
plans, solve problems, and do other work that requires 
top mental performance. Rather than wait for the spirit to 
move you, sit down and move your spirit. 

--- Page 232 ---
226 GHTHE ACTION HABIT 
Here's a special technique guaranteed to help you: Use a 
pencil and paper. A simple pencil is the greatest concentration tool 
money can buy. If I had to choose between an ultrafancy; deeply 
carpeted, beautifully decorated, soundproof office and a pencil 
and paper, I'd choose the pencil and paper every time. With a . 
pencil and paper you can tie your mind to a problem. 
When you write a thought on paper, your full attention 
is automatically focused on that thought. That's because the 
mind is not designed to think one thought and write another 
at the same time. And when you write on paper, you "write" 
on your mind, too. Tests prove conclusively that you remember 
something much longer and much more exactly if you write the 
thought on paper. 
And once you master the pencil-and-paper technique for 
concentration, you can think in noisy 01' other distracting situa­
tions. When you want to think, start writing or doodling or dia­
gramming. It's an excellent way to move your spirit. 
Now is the magic word of success. Tomorrow, Itext week, later, 
sometime, someday often as not are synonyms for the failure word, 
never. Lots of good dreams never come true because we say, 'Til 
start someday," when we should say, ''I'll start now, right now." 
Take one example, saving money. Just about everybody 
agrees that saving money is a good idea. But just because it's a 
good idea doesn't mean many folks follow an organized savings 
and investment program. Many people have intentions to save, 
but only relatively few act on these intenrions. 
Here's how one young couple got into gear with a regular 
wealth accumulation program. Bill's take-home income was 

--- Page 233 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 227 
$1,000 a month, but he and his wife, Janet, spent $1,000 each 
month too. Both wanted to save, but there were always reasons 
why they felt they couldn't begin. For years they had promised 
themselves, "We'll start when we get a raise," "When we've 
caught up with our installments," "When we're over the hump," 
"next month," "next year." 
Finally Janet got disgusted with their failure to save. She 
said to Bill, "Look, do we want to save or don't we?" He replied, 
"Of course we do, but you know as well as I we can't put aside 
anything now." 
But for once Janet was in a do-or-die mood. 'We've been 
telling ourselves for years we're going to start a savings program. 
We don't save because we think we can't. Now let's start think­
ingwe can. I saw an ad today that shows if we'd save just $100 a 
month, in ftfteen years, we'd have $18,000 plus $6,600 accumu­
lated interest. The ad also said it's easier to spend what's left over 
after savings than it is to save what's left over after spending. If 
you're game, let's start with 10 percent of your pay and let's save 
off the top. We may eat crackers and milk before the month's up, 
but if we have te), we will." 
Bill and Janet were cramped for a few months, but soon 
they were adjusted to their new budget. Now they feel it's just 
as much fun to "spend" money on savings as it is to spend it on 
something else. 
Want to write a note to a ftiend? Do it now: Got an idea you 
think would help your business? Present it now: Live the advice 
of Benjamin Franklin: "Don't put off until tomorrow what you 
can do today." 
Remember, thinking in terms of now gets things accom-

--- Page 234 ---
228 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
plished. But thinking in terms of someday or sometime usually . 
means failure. 
One day I stopped in to see an old business friend. She had just 
returned from a conference with several of her executives. The 
moment 1 looked at her, 1 could tell there was something she 
wanted to get off her chest. She had the look of a woman who 
had suffered real disappointment. 
''You know," she said, "I called that conference this morning 
because 1 wanted some help on a proposed policy:change. But 
what kind of help did 1 get? 1 had six men in there, and only one 
of them had anything to contribute. 1\vo others talked, but what 
they said was just an echo of what I had said. It was like talking 
with a bunch of vegetables. 1 confess it's hard for me to fmd out 
what those fellows think. 
"Really," she went on, "you'd think those fellows would 
speak up and let me know what they think. After all, it directly 
affects each of them." 
My friend didn't get help in the conference. But had you 
roamed the hall after the meeting broke up, you'd have heard 
her junior associates making remarks like "I felt like saying ... ," 
"Why didn't someone suggest ... ," "I don't think ... ," "We 
ought to go ahead ... " 
So often the vegetables, those who have nothing to say in 
the conference room, are full of talk after the meeting, when 
what they've got to say won't make any difference. They're sud­
denly full of life when it's too late. 
Business executives want comment. The fellow who hides 
his light under a bushel hurts himself. 
Get the "speak up" habit. Each time you speak up, you 

--- Page 235 ---
GETTHE ACTlotl HABIT 229 
strengthen yourself. Come forward with your constructive 
ideas. 
We all know how many college students prepare their 
assignments. With fme intentions, Joe College sets aside a whole 
evening for some concentrated study. Here is a general pattern 
of how, too often, the evening is spent.' 
Joe's ready to begin studying at 7 P.M., but his dinner seems 
just a bit heavy, so he decides to get in a little TV. A little turns 
out to be an hour's worth since the program was pretty good. At 
8 P.M. he sits down at his desk but gets right back up because he 
just re?,embered he promised to call his girl. This shoots another 
forty minutes (he hadn't talked to her all day). An incoming call 
takes another twenty minutes. On his way back to his desk Joe 
is drawn into a Ping-Pong game. Another hour gone. The Ping­
Pong makes him feel sweaty, so he takes a shower. Next he needs 
a snack. The combined effect of the Ping-Pong and the shower 
have made him hungry. 
And so the evening phinned with good intentions drifts 
away. Finally; at 1 A.M., he opens the book, hut he's too sleepy to 
absorb the subject. Finally he surrenders completely. Next morn­
ing he tells the professot; "[ hope you give me a break. [ studied 
till 2 A.M. for this exam." 
Joe College didn't get into action because he spent too 
much time getting ready to get into action. And Joe College isn't 
alone in being a victim of "overpreparedness." Joe Salesman, Joe 
Executive, Joe Professional Worker, Josephine Housewife-they 
all often try to build strength and get ready with office chats, 
coffee breaks, sharpening pencils, reading, personal business, 
getting the desk cleared off, TV; and dozens of other little escape 
devices. 

--- Page 236 ---
230 GETTHEACTION HABIT 
But there's a way to break this habit. Tell yourself, 'Tm in 
condition right now to begin. I can't gain a thing by putting it off. 
I'll use the 'get ready' time and energy to get going instead:" 
"What we want more than anything else in our business," 
an executive in a machine tool company said in an address to'a 
group 'of sales executives, "is more people who get sound ideas 
and then push them through. There's not one job in our produc­
tion and marketing setup that can't be done better, a lot hetter. 
I don't want to infer that we're not doing a good job now. We 
are. But like all progressive companies, we need new products, 
new markets, new and more efficient ways of doing things. We 
depend on people with initiative. They're the ball carriers on our 
team." 
Initiative is a special kind of action. It's doing something 
worthwhile without being told to do it. The person with initia­
tive has a standing invitation to join the high income brackets in 
every business and profession. 
The director of marketing research in a medium-sized drug 
manufacturing firm told me how he got to be a director of mar­
keting research. It's a good lesson in the power of initiative. 
"Five years ago I got an idea," he told me. "I was working 
then as a sort of missionary salesman, calling on wholesalers. I 
discovered that one thing we lacked was facts about the consum­
ers we wanted to buy our drug line. I talked about the need for 
market research to everyone here. At first I got only deaf ears 
because management couldn't see the need for it. 
"I was pretty much obsessed with the idea of marketing 
research in our company, so I sort of took the bull by the horns. 
I asked and got permiSSion to prepare a monthly report on 'Facts 
of Drug Marketing.'r collected information from every source r 

--- Page 237 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 231 
could fmd. I kept on with this, and pretty soon management, and 
the other salesmen, found themselves really interested in what 
I was doing. Just one year after I started crusading for research, 
I was relieved of my regular duties and asked to concentrate on 
developing my ideas. 
"The rest," he continued, "was just natural development. 
Now I've got two assistants, a secretary, and about three times 
the yearly income I had five years ago." 
Here are two special exercises for developing the initiative 
habit: 
1. Be a crusader. When you see something that you believe 
ought to be done, pick up the ball and run. 
A new subdivision not far from where I live was about 
two·thirds built when expansion came almost to a stand· 
still. A few families with a don't-care attitude had moved 
in. This prompted several of the fmest families in the area 
to sell their homes (at a loss) and move on. As so often 
happens, the do·care families caught the don't-care attitude 
from their don't-care neighbors--everyone, that is, except 
Harry L. Harry did care, and he decided to crusade for a 
fine neighborhood. 
Harry began by calling together some friends. He 
pointed out that this subdivision had tremendous potential 
but that something must be done now or the area would 
soon be a strictly second-class neighborhood. Harry's 
enthusiasm and initiative quickly won support. Soon there 
were clean-up-the-vacant-lots projects. Garden' clubs were 
organized, a massive tree-planting project was started. A 
playground was built for the youngsters. A community 

--- Page 238 ---
232 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
swimming pool was constructed. The don't-care families 
became eager supporters. The whole subdivision took on 
new life and new sparkle. It's really a pleasure now to drive 
through that coinmunity. It shows what a crusader can do. 
Do you feel your business should develop a new depart­
ment, inake a new product, 01' in some other way expand? 
Well, then, crusade for it. Feel your church needs a new 
building? Crusade for it. Would you like your childrens' 
school to have better equipment? Crusade and. get it for 
them. 
And you can bank on this: while crusades may start out 
as one-man crusades, if the idea behind the enterprise is 
good, soon you'll have lots of support. 
Be an activationist and crusade. 
2. Be a volunteer: Each of us has been in situations in which 
we wanted to volunteer for some activity but didn't. Why? 
Because of fear. Not fear that we couldn't accomplish the 
task, but rather fear of what our associates would say. The 
fear of being laughed at, of being called an eager beaver, 
of being accused of bucking for a raise holds many people 
back. 
It's natural to want to belong, to be accepted, to have 
group approval. But ask yourself, "Which group do I want to 
have accept me: the group that laughs because it is secredy 
jealous or the group that is making progress by doing things?" 
The right choice is obvious. 
The volunteer stands out. He receives special attention. 
Most important of all, he gives himself an opportunity to 

--- Page 239 ---
GETTHE ACTION HABIT 233 
show he has special ability and ambition by volunteering. 
By all means, volunteer for those special assignments. 
Think about the leaders you know in business, the military, 
your community. Do they fit the description of activationist or 
would you say they are passivationists? 
Ten times out of ten they're a~tivationists, people who do 
things. The fellow who stands on the sidelines, who holds off, 
who is passive, does not lead. But the doer, the fellow who thinks 
action, finds others want to follow him. 
People pla'ce confidence in the fellow who acts. They natu­
rally assume he knows what he is doing. 
I've n'ever heard anyone complimented .and praised because 
"he doesn't disturb anyone," "he doesn't take action," or "he 
waits until he's told what to do." 
Have you? 
GROW THE ACTION HABIT 
Practice these key points: 
1. Be an activationist. Be someone who does things. Be a doer, 
not a don't-er. 
2. Don't wait until conditions are perfect. They never will be. 
Expect future obstacles and difficulties and solve them as 
theyatise. 
3. Remember, ideas alone won't bring success. Ideas have 
value only when you act upon them. 

--- Page 240 ---
234 GETTHE ACTION HABIT 
4. Use action to cure fear and gain confidence. Do what you 
fear, and fear disappears. Just try it and see. 
5. Start your mental engine mechanically. Don't wait· for the 
spirit to move you. Take action, dig in, and you move the 
spirit. 
6. 1bink in terms of now. Tomorrotv, next week, later; and 
similar words often are synonymous with the failure word, 
never. Be an "I'm starting right now" kind of person. 
7. Get down to business-pronto. Don't waste time getting 
ready to act. Start acting instead. 
8. Seize the initiative. Be a crusader. Pick up the ball and run. 
Be a volunteer. Show that you have the ability and ambi­
tion to do. 
Get itl gear and go! 

--- Page 241 ---
11 
HOW TO TURN DEFEAT INTO VIGTORY 
SOCIAL WOl11(EHS AND OTHEr,S who work on skid row fmd 
many differences in age, religious faith, education, and back­
ground among the tragic souls who have dropped into Arrlerica> s 
gutters. Some of these citizens are surprisingly young. Others 
are old. A sprinkling are college graduates; a few have essentially 
no formal education. Some are married; others are not. But the 
people on skid row do have something in common: each one 
is defeated, whipped, beaten. Bach one has encountered situ­
ations that conquered him. Bach is eager, even anxious, to tell 
you about the situation that wrecked him, about his own private 
Waterloo. 
These situations cover the waterfront of human experience 
from "My wife ran out on me" to "I lost everything I had and had 
no place else to go" to "I did a couple of things that made me a 
social outcast, so I came down here." 
When we move up from skid row into the dominion of Mr. 
and Mrs. Average American, we see obvious differences in living 
habits. But again we discover that Mr. Mediocre gives essentially 
the same reasons to explain his mediocrity as Mr. Skid Row 
gave to explain his complete collapse. Inside, Mr. Mediocre feels 

--- Page 242 ---
236 HOWTOTURN DEfEAT mTO VICTORY 
defeated. He has unhealed wounds suffered in situations that 
beat him. Now he is supercautious. He plods along. ducking the 
thrill of living victoriously, discontented with himself. He feels 
beaten but tries hard to endure the sentence of mediocrity that 
"fate" has handed him. 
He, too, has surrendered to defeat, but in a reasonably 
clean, socially "accepted" way. 
Now, when we climb upstairs into the uncrowded world 
of success, we again discover people fi'om every possible back­
ground. Corporate executives, leading ministers, government 
officials, top men in every field, we discover, come from poor 
homes, rich homes, broken homes, cotton patches, cornfields, 
and slums. These people, who lead every branch of our society, 
have experienced every tough situation you can describe. 
It is possible to match every Mr. Skid Row with a Mr. 
Mediocre and a Mr. Success on every score-age, intelligence, 
background, nationality, you name it-with one exception. The 
one thing you can't match them on is their response to defeat. 
When the fellow we call Mr. Skid Row got knocked down, 
he failed to get up again. He just lay there, splattered out. Mr. 
Mediocre. got up to his knees, but he crawled away, and when 
out of sight, ran in the opposite direction so he'd be sure never 
to take a beating again. 
But Mr. Success reacted differently when he got knocked 
down. He bounced up, learned a lesson, forgot the beating, and 
moved upward. 
One of my closest friends is an exceptionally successful 
management consultant. When you walk into his office, you feel 
that you are really "uptown." The fine furniture, the carpeting, 

--- Page 243 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT !tHO VICTORY 237 
the busy people, the important clients,. all tell you his company 
is prosperous. 
A cynic might say, "It must have taken a real can man to 
put across an operation like this." But the cynic would be wrong. 
It didn't take a can man. And it didn't take a brilliant man 01' a 
wealthy man or a lucky man. All (and I hesitate to use the word 
all because all means so much sometimes) all it took was a persis· 
tent man who never thought he was defeated. 
Behind this prosperous and respected company is the 
story of a man fighting, battling his way upward: losing ten 
years' savings in his first six months in business, living in his 
office several months because he lacked money to p'ay rent on 
an apartment, turning down numerous "good" jobs because he 
wanted more to stay with his idea and make it work, hearing 
prospects for his service say no a hundred times as often as they 
said yes ... 
During the seven unbelievably hard years it took him to 
succeed, I never heard my friend complain once. He'd explain, 
"Dave, I'm learning. This is competitive business, and because 
it's intangible, it's hard to sell. But I'm learning how;" 
And he did. 
Once I told my friend that this experience must be taking a 
lot out of him. But he replied, "No, it's not taking something out 
of me; it's putting something into me instead." 
Check the lives of the people in Who's Who ill America, and 
you'll find that those who have succeeded in a major way have 
been pounded by losing situations. Each person in this elite corps 
of successful men has encountered opposition, discouragement, 
setbacks, personal misfortune. 

--- Page 244 ---
238 HOWTO TURII DEFEAT IIITO VICTORY 
Read the biographies and autobiographies of great people, 
and again you discover that each of these people could have sur­
rendered to setbacks many times. 
01' do this. Learn the bacl,:ground of the president of your 
company or the mayor of your city; or select any person you 
consider a real succ~ss. When you probe, you'll discover the 
individual has overcome big, real obstacles. 
It is Itot possible to win high-level success without meeting 
opposition, hardship, and setback. But it is possible to use set­
backs to propel you forward. Let's see how; 
I saw some commercial airline statistics recently show­
ing that there is only one fatality per 10 billion miles flown. Ail' 
travel is a magnificently safe way to go these days. Unfortunately; 
air accidents still occur .. But when they do, the Civil Aviation 
Administration is on the scene quickly to fmd out what caused 
the crash. Fragments of metal are picked up from miles arouud 
and pieced rogether. A variety of experts reconstruct what prob­
ably happened. Witnesses and survivors. are interviewed. The 
investigation goes on for weeks, months, until the question 
"What caused this crash?" is answered. 
Once the CAA has the answer, immediate steps are taken 
to prevent a similar accident from happening again. If the 
crash was caused by a structural defect, other planes of that 
type must have that defect corrected. Or if certain instruments 
are found faulty; corrections must be made. Literally hundreds 
of safety devices on modern aircraft have resulted from CAA 
investigations. 
The CAA studies ~etbacks to pave the way to safer air travel. 
And it's obvious that their efforts payoff. 
Doctors use setbacks to pave the way to better health and 

--- Page 245 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 239 
longer life. Often when a patient dies for an uncertain reason, 
doctors perform a postmortem to find out why. In this way they 
learn more about the functioning of the human body, and lives 
of other people are saved. 
A sales executive fi-iend of mine devotes one entire sales 
meeting a month to helping his salesmen discover why they 
lost important sales. The lost sale is reconstructed and carefully 
examined. In this way, the salesman learns how to avoid losing 
similar sales in the future. 
The football coach who wins more games than he Io"ses 
goes over the details of each game with his team to point out 
their mistakes. Some coaches have movies made of each game 
so the team can literally see its bad moves. The purpose: to play 
the next game better. 
CAA officials, successful sales executives, physicians, foot­
ball coaches, and professionals in every field follow this success 
principle: salvage somethingfrom every setback. 
When a setback hits us personally, our first impulse is often 
to become so emotionally upset that we fail to learn the lesson. 
Professors know that a student's reaction to a failing grade 
provides a clue to his success potential. When I was a profes­
sor at Wayne State University in Detroit some years ago, I had 
. no choice but to turn in a failing grade for a graduating senior. 
This was a real blow. to the student. He had already made 
graduation plans, and canceling was embarrassing. He was left 
with two alternatives: retake and pass the course and receive 
his degree at a later graduation, or quit school without earning 
a degree. 
I expected that the student would be disappointed, perhaps 
even somewhat belligerent, when he learned of his setback. I 

--- Page 246 ---
240 HOWTOTURN OEFEAT INTO VICTORY 
was right. After I explained that his work was far below passing 
standards, the student admitted that he hadn't put forth a serious 
effort in the course. 
"But," he continued, "my past record is at least average. 
Can't you consider that?" 
I pointed out that I could not, because we measure perfor­
mance one course at a time. I added that rigid academic codes 
prohibited changing grades for any reason other than an honest 
mistake on the part of the professor. 
Then the student, realizing that all avenues toward a grade 
change were closed, became quite angry. "Professor," he said, "I 
could name ftfty people in this city who've succeeded in a big 
way without taking this course or even knowing about it. What's 
so blasted important about this course? Why should a few bad 
marks in one course keep me from getting my degree? 
"Thank God," he added, "they don't look at things on the 
'outside' like you professors do." 
After that remark I paused for about forty-ftve seconds. (I've 
learned that when you've been sniped at, one ftne way to prevent 
a war of words is to take a long pause before answering.) 
Then I said to my student friend, "Much of what you say is 
true. There are many, many highly successful people who know 
absolutely nothing about the subject matter in this course. And 
it is possible for you to win success without this knowledge. In 
the total scheme of life, this course content won't make or break 
you. But your attitude toward this course may." 
"What do you mean by that?" he asked. 
:Just this," I answered. "Outside they grade you just as we 
grade you. What counts there just as what counts here is doing 

--- Page 247 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 241 
the job. Outside they won't promote you or pay you more for 
doing second-class work." 
I paused again to make certain the point got through. 
Then I said, "May [ make a suggestion? You're highly 
disappointed now. I can appreciate how you feel. And I don't 
think any less of you if you're a little sore at me. But look at this 
experience positively. There's a tremendously important lesson 
here: if you don't produce, you don't get where you want to 
go. Learn this lesson, and five years from now you'll regard it 
as one of the most profitable lessons you learned in all the time 
you invested here." 
I was glad when I learned a few days later that this student 
had reenrolled for the course. This' time he passed with flying 
colors. Afterward, he made a special call to see me to let me 
know how much he had appreciated our earlier discussion. 
"[ learned something from flunking your course the first 
time," he said. "It may sound odd, but you know; Professor, now 
I'm glad [ did not pass the first time." 
We cali turn setbacks into victories. Find the lesson, apply 
it, and then look back on defeat and smile. 
Moviegoers will never forget the great Lionel Barrymore. 
In 1936 Mr. Barrymore broke his hip. The fracture never healed. 
Most people thought Mr. Barrymore was finished. But not Mr. 
Barrymore. He used the setback to pave the way to even greater 
acting success. For the next eighteen years, despite pain that never 
abated, he played dozens of successful roles in a wheelchair. 
On March 15, 1945, W. Colvin Williams was walking behind 
a tank in France. The tank hit a mine, exploded, and permanently 
blinded Mr. Williams. 

--- Page 248 ---
242 HOWTOTURN DEfEAT INTO VICTORY 
But this didn't stop Mr. Williams £i'om pursuing his goal 
to be a minister and counselor. When he was graduated from 
college (and with honors too), Mr. Williams said he thought his 
blindness "will actually be an asset in my career. I can never judge 
by appearances. Therefore, I can always give a person a second 
chance. My blindness keeps me from cutting myself off from 
a person because of the way he looks. I want to be the kind of 
person to whom anyone can come and feel secure, to express 
himself." 
Isn't that a magnificent living example of cruel, bitter 
defeat being turned into victory? 
Defeat is only a state of mind, and nothing more. 
One of my fi'iends, who is a substantial and successful 
investor in the stock market, carefully appraises each investment 
decision in the light of his past experiences. One time he told 
me, 'When I first started investing fifteen years ago, I really got 
singed a few times: Like most amateurs, I wanted to get rich 
quick. Instead I got broke quick. But that didn't stop me. I knew 
the basic strengths of the economy and that, over the long pull, 
well-selected stocks are about the best investment anybody can 
make. 
"So I just regarded those first bad investments as part of the 
cost of my education," he laughed. 
On the other hand; I know a number of people who, having 
made an unwise investment or two, are strictly "antisecurities." 
Rather than analyze their mistakes and join in a good thing, they 
reach the completely false conclusion that investing in common 
stocks is just a form of gambling and sooner or later everybody 
loses .. 

--- Page 249 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT UITO VICTORY 243 
Decide right now to salvage something from every set­
back. Next time things seem to go wrong on the job or at home, 
calm down and find out what caused the trouble. This is the way 
to avoid making the same error twice. 
Being licked is valuable if we learn from it. 
We human beings are curious creatures. We're quick to accept 
full credit for our victories. When we win, we want the world to 
know about it. It's natural to want others to look at you and say; 
"There goes the fellow who did such and such." 
But human beings are equally quick to blame someone else 
for each setback. It's natural for salesmen to blame customers 
when sales are lost. It's natural for executives to blame employees 
or other executives when things get out of gear. It's natural for 
husbands to blame wives and wives to blame husbands for quar­
rels and family problems. 
It is true that in this complex world others may trip us. But 
it is also true that more often than not we trip ourselves. We lose 
because of personal inadequacy; some personal mistake. 
Condition yourself for success this way. Remind yourself 
that you want to be as nearly perfect as is humanly possible. Be 
objective. Put yourself in a glass tube and look at yourself as a 
disinterested third party would look at the situation. See if you 
have a weakness that you've never noticed before. If you have, 
take action to correct it. Many people become so accustomed to 
themselves that they fail to see ways for improvement. 
The great Metropolitan Opera star Rise Stevens said in 
Reader's Digest (July 1955) that at the unhappiest moment of her 
life she received the best advice she's ever had. 

--- Page 250 ---
244 HOWTOTURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 
Early in her career, Miss Stevens lost the Metropolitan 
Opera 'i\uditions of the Air." After losing, Miss Stevens was bit­
ter. "I longed to hear," she said, "that my voice was really better 
than the other girl's, that the verdict was grossly unfair, that I had 
just lacked the right connections to win." 
But Miss Stevens's teacher didn't coddle her. Instead she 
said to Miss Stevens, "My dear, have the courage to face your 
faults." 
"Much as I wanted to fall back on self-pity," continued Miss 
Stevens, "they [those words] kept coming back to me. That night 
they woke me. I couldn't sleep until I faced my shortcomings. 
Lying there in the dark, I asked myself, 'Why did I fail?' 'How 
can I win next timel' and I admitted to myself that my voice 
range was not as good as it had to be, that I had to perfect my 
languages, that I must learn more roles." 
Miss Stevens went on to say how facing her faults not only 
helped her to succeed on stage but also helped her win more 
friends and develop a more pleasing personality. 
Being self-critical is constructive. It helps you to build the 
personal strength and efficiency needed for success. Blaming 
others is destructive. You gain absolutely nothing from "proving" 
that someone else is wrong. 
Be constructively self-critical. Don't run away from inad­
equacies. Be like the real professionals. They seek out their faults 
and weaktfesses, then correct them. That's what makes them 
professionals. 
Don't, of course, try to find your faults so you can say to 
yourself, "Here's another reason I'm a loser." 
Instead view your mistakes as "Here's another way to make 
me a bigger winner." 

--- Page 251 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 245 
The great Orville Hubbard once said, 'J\. failure is a man 
who has blundered but is not able to cash in on the experience." 
Often we blame luck for our setbacks. We say, "Well, that's 
the way the ball bounces," and let it go at that. But stop and 
think. Balls don't bounce in certain ways for uncertain reasons. 
The bounce of a ball is determined by three things: the ball, the 
way it is thrown, and the surface it strikes. DefInite physical laws 
explain the bounce of a ball, not luck. 
Suppose the CAA were to issue a report saying, "We're 
sorry the crash occurred, but folks, that's just the way the ball 
bounces," 
You'd say it's time to get a new CAA. Or suppose a doctor 
explained to a relative, 'Tm awfully sorry. I don't know what hap­
pened. It's just one of those things." 
You'd switch doctors when you or another relative became 
ill. 
The that's-the-way-the-ball-bounces approach teaches us 
nothing. We're no better prepared to avoid a duplication of the 
mistake the next time we face' a similar situation. The football 
coach who takes Saturday's loss with "Well, boys, that's the way 
the ball bounces" isn't helping his team avoid the same mistakes 
the next Saturday. 
Orville Hubbard, mayor of Dearborn, Michigan, for seven­
teen consecutive years, is one of the nation's'most colorful and 
respected urban administrators. 
For ten years prior to becoming mayor of Dearborn, Mr. 
Hubbard could have used the "bad luck" excuse and stepped out 
of politics. 
Before becoming a perennial winner, Orville Hubbard was 
"unlucky" three times in trying to get the nomination for mayor. 

--- Page 252 ---
246 HOWTO TURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 
Three times he tried to get the nomination for state senator, but 
failed. Once he was beaten in a race for a congressional nomina­
tion. 
But Orville Hubbard studied these setbacks. He regarded 
them as part of his political education. And today he is one of the 
sharpest, most unbeatable politicians in local government. 
Instead of blaming luck, research those setbacks, If you 
lose, learn. Lots of folks go through life explaining their medi­
ocrity with "hard luck," "tough luck," "sour luck," "bad luck." 
These people are still like children, immature, s'earchiog for sym­
pathy. Without realizing it, they fail to see opportunities to grow 
bigger, stronger, more self-reliant. 
Stop blaming luck. Blaming luck never got anyone where 
he wanted to go. 
A friend who is a literary consultant, writer, and critic chatted 
with me recently about what it takes to be a successful writer. 
'f» lot of would-be writers," he explained, "simply aren't 
serious about wanting to write. They try for a little while but 
give it up when they discover there is real work involved. I 
haven't much patience with these people because they're looking 
for a shortcut and there just isn't one. 
"But," he went on, "I don't want to imply that pure persis­
tence is enough. The plain truth is, ofren it isn't. 
"Just now I'm working with a fellow who's written sixty­
two. short fiction pieces but hasn't sold one. Obviously, he is per­
sistent in his goal to become a writer. But this fellow's problem 
is that he uses the same basic approach in everythiog he writes. 
He's developed a hard format for his stories. He has never experi­
mented with his material-his plots and characters, and perhaps 

--- Page 253 ---
HOWTOTURN DEfEAT INTO VICTORY 247 
even style. What I'm trying to do now is to get this client to try 
some new approaches and some new techniques. He has ability, 
and if he'll do some experimenting, I'm sure he'll sell much of 
what he writes. But until he does, he'll just go on receiving one 
rejection slip after another." 
The advice of the literary consultant is good. We must have. 
persistence. But persistence is oniy one of the ingredients of vic­
tory. We can try and try, and try and try and try again, and still 
fail, uniess we combine persistence with experimentation. 
Edison is credited with being one of Amelica's most per­
sistent scientists. It's reported that he conducted thousands of 
experiments before he invented the electric Iightbulb. But note: 
Edison conducted experiments. He persisted in his goal to develop a 
Iightbulb. But he made that persistence payoff by blending it with 
experimentation. 
Persisting in one way is not a guarantee of victory. But per­
sistence blended with experimentation does guarantee success. 
Recently I noticed an article about the continuous search 
for oil. It said that oil companies study the rock formations care­
fully before they drill a well. Yet, despite their scientific analysis, 
seven out of eight wells drilled tttrn out to be dry holes. Oil com­
panies are persistent i~ their search for oil, not by digging one 
hole to ridiculous depths but rather by experimenting with a new 
well when good judgment says the first well won't produce. 
Many ambitious people go through life with admirable per­
sistence and show of ambition, but they fail to succeed because 
they don't experiment with new approaches. Stay with your goal. 
Don't waver an inch from it. But don't beat your head against a 
wall. If you aren't getting results, try a new approach. 
People who have bulldog persistence, who can grab some-

--- Page 254 ---
248 HOW TO TURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 
thing and not let go, have an essential success qnality. Here are 
two suggestions for developing greater power to experiment, the 
ingredient, that, when blended with persistence, gets results. 
1. Tell yourself, "There IS a way." All thoughts are magnetic. 
As soon as you tell yourself, 'Tm beaten. There's no way to 
conquer this problem," negative thoughts are attracted, and 
each of these helps convince you that you are right, that you are 
whipped. 
Believe instead, "There is a way to solve this problem," and 
positive thoughts rush into your mind to help you fmd a solu­
tion. 
It's believing there is a way that is important. 
Marriage counselors report no success in saving marriages 
untU one and preferably both partners see that it is possible to 
win back happiness. 
Psychologists and social workers sayan alcoholic is doomed 
to alcoholism until he believes he can beat his thirst. 
This year thousands of new businesses are being formed. 
Five years from now only a small portion will be still in opera­
tion. Most of those who faU will say, "Competition was just too 
much. We had no choice but to quit." The real problem is that 
when most people hit the TAR (things are rough) barrier, they 
think only defeat and so they are defeated. 
When you believe there is a way you automatically convert 
negative energy (let's quit, let's go back) into positive energy 
(let's keep going, let's move ahead). 
A problem, a difficulty, becomes unsolvable only when you 
think it is unsolvable. Attract solutions by believing solutions are 
possible. Refuse, simply refuse, to even let yourself say or think 
that it's impossible. 

--- Page 255 ---
HOW TO TURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY. 249 
2. Back off and start afresh. Often we stay so close to a 
problem for so long that we can't see new solutions or new 
approaches .. 
An engineer friend was retained a few weeks ago to design 
a distinctly new aluminum structure; in fact, nothing even resem­
bling it had even been developed, or designed, before. [ saw him 
just a few days ago, and [ asked him how his new building was 
coming along. 
"Not too well," he replied. "[ gness [ haven't spent enough 
time with my garden this summer. When [ live with tough 
design problems for a long stretch, I've got to get away and let 
some new ideas soak in. 
''You'd be surprised," he continued; "to know how many 
engineering ideas come to me when I'm just sitting beside a tree 
holding a water hose on the grass." 
President Eisenhower once was asked at a news conference 
why he took so many weekend vacations. His answer is good 
advice for everybody who wants to maximize his creative abil­
ity. Mr. Eisenhower said, "[ do not believe that any individual, 
whether he is running General Motors or the United States of 
America, ·can do the best job just by sitting at a desk and putting 
his face in a bunch of papers. Actually, the president ought to be 
trying to keep his mind free of inconsequential details and doing 
his own thinking on the basic principles and factors ... so that he 
can make clear and better judgments." 
A former business associate of mine takes a seventy-two­
hour out-of-town vacation with his wife once each month. He 
'found this backing off and starting afresh increased his mental 
efficiency, thereby making him more valuable to his clients. 
When you hit a snag, don't throw up the whole project. 

--- Page 256 ---
250 HOWTOTURN OEFEAT INTO VICTORY 
Instead, back off, get mentally refreshed. Try sometWng as 
simple as playing some music or taking a walk or a short nap. 
Then, when you tackle it again, the solution ofren comes almost 
before you know it. 
Seeing the good side pays off in big situations, too. A young 
man told me how he concentrated on seeing the good side when 
he lost his job. He explained it this way: "I was working for a 
large credit reporting company. One day I was given short notice 
to leave. There was an economy wave on, and they dismissed the 
employees who were 'least valuable' to the company. 
"The job didn't pay too well, but by the standards I grew up 
'with, it was pretty good. I really felt terrible for a few hours, but 
then I decided to look at being bounced as a blessing in disguise. 
I really didn't like the job much, and had I stayed there, 1'd never 
have gone far. Now I had a chance to fmd something I really liked 
to do. It wasn't long until I found a job that I liked. a lot better that 
paid more money, too. Being fired from that credit company was 
the best tWng that ever happened to me." 
Remember, you see in any situation what you expect to 
see. See the good side and conquer defeat. All things do work 
together for good if you'll just develop clear vision. 
IN QUICK REVIEW 
The difference between success and failure is found in one's atti­
tudes toward setbacks, handicaps, discouragements, and other 
disappointing situations. 
Five guideposts to help you turn defeat into victory are: 
1. Study. setbacks to pave your way to success. When you lose, 
learn, and then go on to win next time. 

--- Page 257 ---
HOWTOTURN DEFEAT INTO VICTORY 251 
2. Have the courage to be your own constructive critic. Seek 
out your faults and weaknesses and then correct them. This 
makes you a professional. 
3. Stop blaming luck. Research each setback. Find out what 
went wrong. Remember, blaming luck never got anyone 
where he wanted to go. 
4. Blend persistence with experimentation. Stay with your 
goal but don't beat your head against a stone wall. Try new 
approaches. Experiment. 
5. Remembel; there is a good side in every situation. Find it. 
See the good side and whip discouragement. 

--- Page 258 ---
12 
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
LV f-: f{Y H 1"1" 0 i II U r,.,\ /\ hI progress---our inventions big and little, 
our medical discoveries, our engineering triumphs, our business 
successes-were first visualized before they became realities. 
Baby moons circle the earth not because of accidental discoveries 
but because scientists set "conquer space" as a goal. 
A goal is an objective, a purpose. A goal is more than a dream; 
it's a dream being acted upon. A goal is more than a hazy "Oh, I wish 
I could." A goal is a clear ''This is what I'm working toward." 
NothIng happens, no forward steps are taken, until a goal is 
established. Without goals individuals just wander through life. 
They stumble along, never knowing where they are going, so 
they never get anywhere. 
Goals are as essential to success as air is to life. No one ever 
stumbles into success without a goal. No one ever lives without 
air. Get a clear fix on where you want to go. 
Dave Mahoney rose £i'om a low-paying job in the mail room 
of an advertising agency to an agency vice president at twenty­
seven, and president of the Good Humor Company at thirty­
three. This is what he says about goals: "The important thIng is not 
where you were or where you are but where you want to get." 

--- Page 259 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 253 
The important thing is not where you were or where you are but 
where you want to get. 
The progressive corporation plans company goals ten to 
fifteen years ahead. Executives who manage leading businesses 
must ask. "Where do we want our company to be ten years 
from now?" Then they gauge their efforts accordingly. New plant 
capacity is built not for to day's needs but rather for needs five to 
ten years in the future. Research is undertaken to develop prod­
ucts that won't appear for a decade or longer. 
The modern corporation does not leave its future to 
chance. Should you? 
. Each of us can learn a precious lesson £i'om the forward­
looking business. We can and should plan at least ten years ahead. 
You must form an image now of the person you want to be ten 
years from now if you are to become that image. This is a critical 
thought. Just as the business that neglects to plan ahead will be 
just another business (if it even survives), the individual who fails 
to set long-range goals will most certainly be just another person 
lost in life's shuffle. Without goals \ve cannot grow. 
Let me share with you an example of why we must have 
long-run goals to achieve real success. Just last week a young man 
(let me call him F. B.) came to me with a career problem. F. B. 
looked well mannered and intelligent. He was single and had 
fmished college four years ago. 
We talked for a while about what he was doing nO\'I\ his 
education, his aptitudes, and general background. Then I said 
to him, "You came to see me for help on making a job change. 
What kind of job are you looking for?" 
"Well," he said, "that's what I came to see you about. I don't 
know what I want to do." 

--- Page 260 ---
254 USE GOAlSTO HELP YOU GROW 
His problem, of course, was a very common one. But 1 
realized that just to arrange for the young man to have inter­
views with several possible employers would not help him. 
Trial and error is a pretty· poor way to select a career. With 
dozens of career possibilities, the odds of stumbling into the 
right choice are several dozen to one. 1 knew 1 had to help F. B. 
see that before he starts going some place careerwise, he's got 
to know where that someplace is. 
So 1 said, "Let's look at your career plan from this angle. Will 
you describe for me your image of yourself ten years from now?" 
F. B., obviously studying the question, finally said, "Well, 
1 guess 1 want what just about everyone else wants: a good job 
that pays well and a nice home. Really, though," he continued, "1 
haven't given it too much thought." 
This, 1 assured him, was quite natural. 1 went on to explain 
that his approach to selecting a career was like going to an airline 
ticket counter and saying "Give me a ticket." The people selling 
the tickets just can't help you unless you give them a destination. 
So 1 said, 'lilld 1 can't help you fmd a job until 1 know what your 
destination is, and only you can tell me that." 
This jarred F. B. into thinking. We spent the next two hours 
not talking about the merits of different kinds of jobs, but rather 
discussing how to set goals. F. B. learned, 1 believe, the most 
important lesson in career planning: Before you start out, know 
where you want to go, 
Like the progressive corporation, plan ahead. You are in 
a sense a business unit. Your talent, skills, and abilities are your 
"products." You want to develop your products so they com­
mand the highest possible price. Forward planning will do it. 
Here are two steps that will help: 

--- Page 261 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 255 
First, visualize your future in terms of three departments: 
work, home, and social, Dividing your life this way keeps you 
from becoming, confused, prevents conflicts, helps you look at 
the whole picture, 
Second, demand of yourself clear, precise answers to these 
questions: What do I want to accomplish with my life? What do 
I want to be? and What does it take to satisfy me? 
Use the plannlng guide below to help, 
AN IMAGE OF ME, 10 YEARS FROM NOW: 
10YEARS' PLANNING GUIDE 
A. Work Department: 10 years from now: 
1. What income level do I want to attain? 
2. What level of responsibility do I seek? 
3. How much authority do I want to command? 
4. What prestige do I expect to gain from my work? 
B. Home Department: 10 years from now: 
1. What kind of standard of living do I want to provide for 
my family and myself? 
2. What kind of house do I want to live in? 
3. What kind of vacations do I want to take? 
4. What financial support do I want to give my children in 
their early adult years? 
C. Social Department: 10 years from now: 
1. What kinds of friends do I want to have? 
2. What social groups do I want to join? 
3. What community leadership positions would I like to hold? 
4. What worthwhile causes do I want to champion? 

--- Page 262 ---
256 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
A 'few years ago, my young son insisted the two of us build 
a doghouse for Peanut, an intelligent pup of dubious pedigree 
and my son's pride and joy. His persistence and enthusiasm won, 
so we proceeded to build a hom" Peanut could call her own, Our 
combined carpentry talent equaled zero, and the end product 
clearly reflected that fact. 
Shortly afterward a good friend stopped by and upon see­
ing what we had done asked, "What's that you've stuck up there 
among the trees? That's not a doghouse, is it?" I replied that it 
was. Then he pointed out just a few of our mistakes and summed 
it all up with "Why didn't you get a plan? Nobody these days 
builds a doghouse without a blueprint." 
And, please, as you visualize your futu~e, don't be afraid to 
be blue sky. People these days are measured by the size of their 
dreams. No one accomplishes more than he sets out to accom­
plish. So visualize a big future. 
Below is a word-for-word excerpt from the life plan of one 
of my former trainees. Read it. Note how well this fellow visual­
ized his "home" future. As he wrote this, it is obvious he really 
saw himself in the future. 
"My home goal is to own a country estate. The house 
will be of the typical Southern-manor type, two stories, white 
columns and all. We will have the grounds fenced in, and prob­
ably will have a fishpond or two on the place as my wife and I 
both enjoy fishing. We will keep our Doberman kennels back of 
the house somewhere. The thing I have always wanted is a long 
winding driveway with trees lining each side. 
"But a house is not necessarily a home. I am going to do 
everything I can to make our house more than just a place to eat 
and sleep. Of course, we do not intend to leave God out of our 

--- Page 263 ---
USE GOALSTO HELP YOU GROW 257 
plans and throughout the years we will spend a certain amount 
of time in church activities. 
,"Ten years from now I want to be in a position to take a 
family cruise around the world. I would like very much to do this 
before the family gets scattered all over the world by marriages, 
etc. If we can't find time to make the cruise all at once, we will 
put it into four or five separate vacations and visit a different part 
of the world each year. Naturally, all these plans in 'home depart­
ment' depend on how well things go in my 'work department: 
so I'll have to keep on the ball if I'm to accomplish all this." 
This plan was written five years ago. The trainee then 
owned two small dimestores. Now he owns five. And he has 
purchased seventeen acres for his country estate. He's thinking 
and progressing right along toward his goal. 
The three departments of your life are closely interrelated. 
Each depends on the others to some extent. But the one depart­
ment that has the most influence over the other departments is 
your work. Thousands of years ago the caveman who had the 
happiest home life and was most respected by his cavemates was 
the fellow who was most successful as a hunter. As a generaliza­
tion, the same point holds true today. The standard of living we 
provide our families and the social and community respect we 
attain depends largely on our success in the work department. 
Not long ago the McKinsey Foundation for Management 
Research conducted a large-scale study to determine what it 
takes to become an executive. Leaders in business, government, 
science, and religion were questioned. Over and over again in 
different ways these researchers' kept getting one answer: the 
most important qualification for an executive is the sheer desire 
to get ahead. 

--- Page 264 ---
258 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
Remember this advice of John Wanamaker: "A man is not 
doing much until the cause he works for possesses all there is of 
him." 
Desire, when harnessed, is power. Failure to follow desire, to 
do what you want to do most, paves the way to mediocrity. 
I recall a conversation with a very promising young writer 
on a college newspaper. This fellow had ability. If anyone showed 
promise for a career in journalism, it was he. Shortly before his 
graduation I asked him, "Well, Dan, what are you going to do, 
get into some form of journalism?" Dan looked at me and said, 
"Heck, no! I like writing and reporting very much, and I've had 
a lot of fun working on the college paper. But journalists are a 
dime a dozen,.and I don't want to starve." 
I didn't see or hear from Dan for five years. Then one eve­
ning I chanced to meet him in New Orleans. Dan was working as 
an assistant personnel director for an electronics company. And 
he was quick to let me know that he was quite dissatisfied with 
his work. "Oh, I'm reasonably well paid. I'm with a wonderful 
company, and I've got reasonable security. but you know, my 
heart isn't in it. I wish now I'd gone with a publisher or newspa­
per when I finished schoo!." 
Dan's attitude reflected boredom, uninterest. He was cyni­
cal about many things. He will never achieve maximum success 
until he quits his present job and gets into journalism. Success 
requires heart-and-soul effort, and you can put your heart and 
soul oniy into something you really desire. 
Had Dan followed his desire, he could have risen to the very 
top in some phase of communication. And over the long pull he 
would have made much more money and achieved far more per­
sonal satisfaction than he will find in his present kind of work. 

--- Page 265 ---
USE GOALSTO HELP YOU GROW 259 
Switching from what you don't like to do to what you do 
like to do is like putting a five-hundred-horsepower motor in a 
ten-year-old car. 
All of us have desires. All of us dream of what we really 
want to do. But few of us actually surrender to desire. Instead of 
surrendering to desire, we murder it. Five weapons are used to 
commit success suicide. Destroy them. They're dangerous. 
1. Selfdepreciation. You have heard dozens of people say, "I 
would like to be a doctor (or an executive or a commercial 
artist or ill business for myself) but I can't do it." "I lack 
brains." 'T d fail if I tried." "I lack the education and! or 
experience." Many young folks destroy desire with the old 
negative self-depreciation. 
2. "SeCllrity-itis." Persons who say, 'Tve got security where I 
am" use the security weapons to murder their dreams. 
3. Competition. "The field is already overcrowded," "People in 
that field are standing on top of each other" are remarks 
which kill desire fast. 
4. Parental dictation. I've heard hundreds of young people 
explain their career choice with 'T d really like to prepare 
for something else, but my parents want me to do this so I 
must." Most parents, I believe, do not intentionally dictate 
to their children what they must do. What all intelligent 
parents want is to see their children live successfully. If the 
young person will patiently explain why he or she prefers 
a different career, and if the parent will listen, there will be 

--- Page 266 ---
260 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
no friction. The objectives of both the parent and the young 
person for the young person's career are identical: success. 
5. Family responsibility. The attitude of "It would have been 
wise for me to change over five years ago, but now I've got 
a family and I can't change," illustrates this kind of desire 
murder weapon. 
Throwaway those murder weapons! Remember, the only 
way to get full power, to develop full go force, is to do what you 
want to do .. Surrender to desire and gain energy; enthusiasm, 
mental zip, and even better health .. 
And it's never too late to let desire take over. 
The overwhelming majority of really successful people 
work much longer than forty hours a week. And you don't hear. 
them complain of overwork. Successful people have their eyes 
focused on a goal, and this provides energy. 
The point is this: energy increases, multiplies, when you 
set a desired goal and resolve to work toward that goal. Many 
people, millions of them, can fmd new energy by selecting a goal 
and giving all they've got to accomplish that goal. Goals cure 
boredom. Goals even cure many chronic ailments. 
Let's probe a little deeper into the power of goals. When 
you surrender yourself to your desires, when you let yourself 
become obsessed with a goal, you receive the physical power, 
energy; and enthusiasm needed to accomplish your goal. But you 
receive' something else, something equally valuable. You receive 
the "automatic instrumentation" needed to keep you going 
straight to your objective. 
The most amazing thing about a deeply entrenched goal is 

--- Page 267 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 261 
that it keeps you on course to reach your target. This isn't dou­
ble-talk. What happens is this. When you surrender to your goal, 
the goal works itself into your subconscious mind. Your subcon­
scious mind is always in balance. Your conscious mind is not, 
unless it is in tune with what your subconscious mind is thinking. 
Without full cooperation from the subconscious mind, a person 
is hesitant, confused, indecisive. Now, with your goal absorbed 
into your subconscious mind you react the right way automati­
cally. The conscious mind is free for clear, straight thinking. 
Let's illustrate this with two hypothetical persons. As you 
read on you'll recognize these characters among the real people 
you know. We'll call them Tom and Jack. These fellows are com­
parable in all respects except one: Tom has a fIrmly entrenched 
goal; Jack does not. Tom has a crystal-clear image of what he 
wants to be. He pictures himself as a corporation vice president 
ten years hence. 
Because Tom has surrendered to his goal, his goal through 
his subconscious mind signals to him saying "do this" or "don't 
do that; it won't help get you where you want to go." The goal 
constantly speaks, "1 am the image you want to make real. Here 
is what you must do to make me real." 
Tom's goal does not pilot him in vague generalities. It gives 
him specifIc directions in all his activities. When Tom buys a 
suit, the goal speaks and shows Tom the wise choice. The goal 
helps to show Tom what steps to take to move up to the next job, 
what to say in the business conference, what to do when conflict 
develops, what to read, what stand to take. Should Tom drift a 
little off course, his automatic instrumentation, housed securely 
in his subconscious mind, alerts him and tells him what to do to 
get back on course. 

--- Page 268 ---
262 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
Tom's goal has made him supersensitive to all the many 
forces at work that affect him. 
Jack, on the other hand, lacking a goal, also lacks the auto­
matic instrumentation to guide him. He is easily confused. His 
actions reflect no personal policy. Jack wavers, shifts, guesses at 
what to do. Lacking consistency of purpose, Jack flounders on 
the rutty road to mediocrity. 
May I suggest you reread the above section, right now. Let 
this concept soak in. Then look around you. Study the very top 
echelon of successful persons. Note how they, without excep­
tion, are totally devoted to their objective. Observe how the life 
of a highly successful person is integrated around a purpose. 
Surrender to that goal. Really surrender. Let it obsess you 
and give you the automatic instrumentation you need to reach 
that goal. 
On occasion all of us have waked up on Saturday morning 
with no plans, no agenda either mental or written that spells 
out what we're going to do. On days like that we accomplish 
next to nothing. We aimlessly drift through the day, glad when 
it's finally over. But when we face the day with a plan, we get 
things done. 
This common experience provides an important lesson: to 
accomplish something, we must plan to accomplish something. 
Before World War II our scientists saw the potential power 
locked in the atom. But relatively little was known about how 
to split the atom and uuleash that tremendous power. When 
the United States entered the war, forward-looking scientists 
saw the potential power of an atomic bomb. A crash program 
was developed to accomplish just one goal: build an atomic 

--- Page 269 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 263 
bomb. The result is history. In just a few years the concentrated 
effort paid off. The bombs were dropped, and the war was 
ended. But without that crash program to accomplish a goal, 
splitting the atom would have been delayed perhaps a decade, 
maybe longer. 
Set goals to get things done. 
Our great production system would be hopelessly bogged 
down if production executives did not establish and adhere to 
target dates and production schedules. Sales executives know 
salesmen sell more when they are given a carefully defmed quota 
to sell. Professors know students get term papers written on time 
when a deadline is set. 
Now, as you press forward to success, set goals: deadlines, 
target dates, self-imposed quotas. You will accomplish only what 
you plan to accomplish. 
According to Dr. George E. Burch of the Tulane University 
School of Medicine, an expert in the study of human longevity, 
many things determine how long you will live: weight, heredity, 
diet, psychic tension, personal habits. But Dr. Burch says, '7he 
quickest way·to the end is to retire and do nothing. Every human 
being must keep an interest in life just to keep living." 
Each of us has a choice. Retirement can be the beginning or 
the end. The" do nothing but eat, sleep, and rock" attitude is the 
poison-yourself-fast form of retirement. Most folks who regard 
retirement as the end of purposeful living soon fmd retirement 
is the end of life itself. With nothing to live for, no goals, people 
waste away fast. 
The other extreme, the sensible way to retire, is the 'Tm 
going to pitch right in and start fast" method. One of my fmest 

--- Page 270 ---
264 USE GOALS TO HElP YOU GROW 
friends, Lew Gordon, has chosen this way to retire. Lew's retire­
ment several years ago as a vice president of Atlanta's biggest 
bank was really Commencement Day for him. He established 
himself as a business consultant. And his pace is amazing. 
Now in his sixties, he serves numerous clil'nts and is in 
national demand as a speaker. One of his special projects is help­
ing to build Pi Sigma Epsilon, a young but fast-growing fraternity 
for professional salesmen and sales executives. Every time I see 
Lew he seems younger. He's a young thirty in spirit. Few people 
I know of any age are reaping more from life than this senior 
citizen who resolved not to go out to pasture. 
And the Lew Gordons aren't the boring old grumps feeling 
sorry for themselves because they're old. 
Goals, intense goals, can keep a person alive when noth­
ing else will. Mrs. ,D., the mother of a college friend of mine, 
contracted cancer when her son was only two. To darken mat­
ters, her husband had died only three months before her illness 
was diagnosed. Her physicians offered little hope. But Mrs. D. 
would not give up. She was determined that she would see her 
two-year-old son through college by operating a small retail 
store left her by her husband. There were numerous surgical 
operations. Each time the doctors would' say, 'Just a few more 
months." 
The cancer was never cured. But those "few more months" 
stretched into twenty years. She saw her son graduated from col­
lege. Six weeks later she was gone. 
A goal, a burning desire, was powerful enough to stave off 
sure death for two decades. 
Use goals to live longer. No medicine in the world-and 

--- Page 271 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 265 
your physician will bear this out-is as powerful in bringing 
about long life as is the desire to do something. 
The person determined to achieve maximum success learns the 
principle that progress is made one step at a time. A house is built a 
brick at a time. Football games are won a play at a time. A depart­
ment store grows bigger one new customer at a time. Every big 
accomplishment is a series of little accomplishments. 
Eric Sevareid, the well-known author and correspondent, 
reported in Reader's Digest (April 1957) that the best advice he 
ever received was the principle of the "next mile." Here's part of 
what he said: 
"During WoNd War II, I and several others had to para­
chute from a crippled Army transport plane into the mountain­
ous jungle .on the Burma-India border. It was several weeks 
before an armed relief expedition could reach us, and then we 
began a painful, plodding march' out' to civilized India. We were 
faced by a 140-mile trek, over mountains, in August heat and· 
monsoon rains. 
"In the first hour of the march I rammed a boot nail deep 
into one foot; by evening I had bleeding blisters the size of a 50-
cent piece on both feet. Could I hobble 140 miles( Could the oth­
e.rs, some in worse shape than I, complete such a distancel We 
were convinced we could not. But we could hobble to that ridge, 
we could make the next friendly villag~ for the night. And that, of 
course, was all we had to do .... 
"When I relinquished my job and income to undertake a 
book of a quarter of a million words, I could not bear to let my 
mind dwell on the whole scope of the project. I would surely 

--- Page 272 ---
266 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
have abandoned what has become my deepest source of profes­
sional pride. I tried to think only of the next paragraph, not the 
next page and certainly not the next chapter. Thus, for six solid 
months, I never did anything but set down one paragraph after 
another. The book 'wrote itself.' 
"Years ago, I took on a daily writing and broadcasting chore 
that has totaled, now, more than 2000 scripts. Had I been asked 
at the time to sign a contract 'to write 2000 scripts' I would have 
refused in despair at the enormousness of such au undertaking. 
But I was only asked to write one, the next one, and that is all I 
have ever done." 
The principle of the "next mile" works for Eric Sevareid, 
and it will work for you. 
The step-by-step method is the only intelligent way to 
attain any objective. The best formula I have heard for quitting 
smoking, the one that has worked for more of my ftiends than 
any other, I call the hour-by-hour method. Instead of trying to 
reach the ultimate goal-freedom fi'om the habit-just by resolv­
ing never to smoke again, the person resolves not to smoke for 
another hour. When the hour is up, the smoker simply renews 
his resolution not to smoke for another hour. Later, as desire 
diminishes, the period is extended to two hours, later to a day. 
Eventually, the goal is won. The person who wants freedom 
from the habit all at once fails because the psychological pain is 
more than he can stand. An hour is easy; forever is difficult. 
Winning any objective requires a step-by-step method. To 
the junior executive, each assignment, however insignificant.it 
may appeal~ should be viewed as an opportunity to take one step 
forward. A salesman qualifies for management responsibilities 
one sale at a time. 

--- Page 273 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 267 
To the minister each sermon, to the professor each lecture, 
to the scientist each experiment, to the business executive each 
conference is an opportunity to take one step forward toward 
the large goal. 
Sometimes it appears that someone achieves success all at 
once. But if you check the past histories of people who seemed 
to arrive at the top suddenly; you'll discover a lot of solid ground­
work was previously laid. And those "successful"' people who 
lose fame as fast as they found it simply were phonles who had 
not built a solid foundation. 
Just as a beautiful building is created from pieces of stone, 
each of which in itself appears insignificant, in like manner the 
successful life is constructed. 
Do this: Start marching toward your ultimate goal by mak­
ing the next task you perform, regardless of how uhimportant it 
may seem, a step in the right direction. Commit this question to 
memory and use it to evaluate everything you do: "Will this help 
take me where 1 want to gor'~ If the answer is no, back off; if yes, 
press ahead .. 
It's clear. We do not make one big jump to success. We get 
there one step at a time. An excellent plan is to set monthiy quo­
tas for accomplishment .. 
Examine yourself Decide what specific things you should 
do to make yourself more effective. Use the form below as a 
guide. Under each of the major headings make notes of the 
things you will do in the next thirty days. Then, when the thirty­
day period is up, check your progress and build a new thirty-day 
goal. Always keep working on the "little"' things to get you in 
shape for the. big things. 

--- Page 274 ---
268 USE GOALSTO HELP YOU GROW 
THIRTY-DAY IMPROVEMENT GUIDE 
Between now and I will 
A. Break these habits: (suggestions) 
1. Putting off things. 
2. Negative language. 
3. Watching TV more than 60 minutes per day. 
4. Gossip. 
B. Acquire these habits: (suggestions) 
1. A rigid morning examination of my appearance. 
2. Plan each day's work the night before. 
3. Compliment people at every possible opportunity. 
C. Increase my value to my employer in these ways: (sugges­
tions) 
1. Do a better job of developing my subordinates. 
2. Learn more about my company, what it does, and the 
customers it serves. 
3. Make three specific suggestions to help my company 
become more efficient. 
D. Increase my value to my home in these ways: (sugges­
tions) 
1. Show more appreciation for the little things my wife 
does that I've been taking for granted. 
2. Once each week, do something special with my whole 
family. 
3. Give one hour each day of my undivided attention to my 
family. 

--- Page 275 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 269 
E. Sharpen my mind in these ways: (suggestions) 
1. Invest two hours each week in reading professional 
magazines in my field. 
2. Read one self-help book. 
3. Make four new friends. 
4. Spend 30 minutes daily in quiet, undisturbed thinking. 
Next time you see a particularly well-poised, well-groomed, 
clear-thinking, effective person, remind yourself that he wasn't 
born that way. Lots of conscious effort, invested day by day, 
made the person what he is. Building new positive habits and 
destroying old negative habits is a day-by-day process. 
Create your first thirty-day improvement guide right nmv. 
Often, when I discuss setting goals, someone comments 
along these lines, "I see that working toward a purpose is impor­
tant, but so often things happen that upset my plans." 
It's true that many factors outside your control do affect 
your destination. There may be serious iliness or death in your 
family; the job you're gunning for may be dissolved, you may 
meet with an accident. 
So here is a point we must fix firmly in mind: prepare to'take 
detours in stride. If you are driving down a road and you come to a 
"road closed" situation, you wouldn't camp there, nor would you 
go back home. The road closed simply means you can't go where 
you want to go on this road. You'd simply fmd another road to 
take you where you want to go. 
Observe what military leaders do. When they develop a 
master plan to take an objective, they also map out alternative 
plans. If something unforeseen happens that rules out plan A, 
they switch to plan B. You rest easy in an airplane even though 

--- Page 276 ---
270 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
the airport where you planned to land is closed in, because you 
know the fellow up there driving the plane has alternative land­
ing fields and a reserve fuel supply. 
It's a rare person who has achieved high-level success who 
has not had to take detours~many of them. 
When we. detour, we don't have to change our goals. We 
just travel a different route. 
You've probably heard many persons say something like "Oh, 
how I wish I had bought XX stock back in 19~. ]' d have a pile of 
money today." 
Normally, people think of investing in terms of stocks or 
bonds, real estate, or some other type of property, But the big­
gest and most rewarding kind of investment is selfinvestment, 
purchasing things that build mental power and proficiency. . 
The progressive business knows that how strong it will be 
five years from now depends not on what it does five years in the 
future but rather on what it does, invests, this year. Profit comes 
from only one source: investment. 
There's a lesson for each of us. To profit, to get the extra 
reward above a "normal" income in the years ahead, we must 
invest in ourselves. We must invest to achieve our goals. 
Here are two sound self-fuvestments that will pay hand­
some profits in the years ahead: 
1. Invest in education. True education is the soundest invest­
ment you can make in yourself. But let's be sure we understand 
what education really is. Some folks measure education by the 
number of years spent in school or the number of diplomas, cer­
tificates, and degrees earned. But this quantitative approach to 

--- Page 277 ---
USE GOALSTO HELP YOU GROW 271 
education doesn't necessarily produce a successful person. Ralph 
J. Cordiner, chairman of General Electric, expressed the attitude 
of top business management toward education this way: "Two 
of our most outstanding presidents, Mr. Wilson and Mr. Coifm, 
never had an opportunity to attend college. Although some of 
our present officers have doctor's degrees, twelve out of forty­
one have'no college degrees. We are interested in competency, 
not diplomas." A diploma or degree may help you get a job, but 
it will not guarantee your progress on the job. "Business is inter­
ested in competency, not diplomas." 
To others, education means the quantity of information 
a person has stashed away in his brain. But the soak-up-facts 
method of education won't get you where you want to go. More 
and more we depend on books, files, and machines to warehouse 
information. If we can do only what a machine can do, we're in 
a real fIx. 
Real education, the kind worth investing in, is that which 
develops and cultivates your mind. How well educated a person 
is, is measured by how well his mind is developed-in brief, by 
how well he thinks. 
Anything that improves thinking ability is education. And 
you can obtain education in many ways. But the most efficient 
sources of education for most people are nearby colleges and 
universities. Education is their business. 
If you haven't been to college lately, you're in for some 
wonderful surprises. You'll be pleased at the wide course offer­
ings available. You'll be even more pleased to discover who goes 
to school after work. Not the phonies, but rather really promising 
persons, many of whom already hold very responsible positions. 

--- Page 278 ---
272 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
In one evening class of twenty-five persons I conducted recently; 
there were an owner of a retail chain of twelve stores, two buyers 
'for a national food chain, four graduate engineers, an Air Force 
colonel, and several others of similar status. 
Many people earn degrees in evening programs these days, 
but the degree, which in the final analysis is only a piece of paper, 
is not their primary motivation. They are going to school to build 
their minds, which is a sure way to invest in a better future. 
And make no mistake about this. Education is a real bar­
gain. A moderate investment will keep you in school one night 
each week for a full year. Compute the cost as a percentage of 
your gross income and then ask yourself, "Isn't my future worth 
this small investment?" 
Why not make an investment decision right now? Call it 
School: Olle Night a Week for Lift. It will keep you progressive, 
young, alert. It will keep you abreast of your areas of interest. 
And it will surround you with other people who also are going 
places. 
2. Invest ill idea starters. Education helps you mold your 
mind, stretch it, train it to meet new situations and solve prob­
lems. Idea starters serve a related purpose. They feed your mind, 
give you constructive material to think about. 
Where are the best sources of idea starters? There are many; 
but to get a steady supply of high-quality idea material, why not 
do this: resolve to purchase at least one stimulating book each 
month and subscribe to two magazines or journals that stress 
ideas. For only a minor sum and a minimum of time, you can be 
tuned in to some of the best thinkers available anywhere. 
At a luncheon one day I overheard one fellow say; "But it 
costs too much. I can't afford to take Tlte Wall Street ]ollf11al;" 

--- Page 279 ---
USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 273 
His companion, obviously a much more success-minded person, 
replied, '.'Well, I've found that I can't afford not to take it." 
Again, take your cue from the successful people. Invest in 
yourself. 
LET'S TAKE ACTION 
Now in a quick recap, put these success-bnilding principles to 
work: 
1. Get a clear fIx on where you want to go. Create an image of 
yourself ten years from now. 
2. Write out your ten-year plan. Your life is too important 
to be left to chance. Put down on ·paper what you want 
to accomplish in your work, your home, and your social 
departments .. 
3. Surrender yourself to your desires. Set goals to get more 
energy. Set goals to get things done. Set goals and discover 
the real enjoyment of living. 
4. Let your major goal be your automatic pilot. When you let 
your goal absorb you, you'll fmd yourself making the right 
decisions to reach your goal. 
5. Achieve your goal one step at a time. Regard each task you 
pelf arm, regardless of how small it may seem, as a step toward 
your goal. 
6. Build thirty-day goals. Day-by-day effort pays off. 

--- Page 280 ---
274 USE GOALS TO HELP YOU GROW 
7. Take detours in stride. A detour simply means another 
. route. It should never mean surrendering the goal. 
8. Invest in yourself. Purchase those things that build mental 
power and efficiency. Invest in education. Invest in idea start­
ers. 

--- Page 281 ---
I 
13 
HOWTOTHINK LlKEA LEADER 
I1EMIND YOURSELF ONCE AGAIN that you are not pulled to high 
levels of success. Rather, you are lifted there by those working 
beside and below you. 
Achieving high-level success requires the support and the 
cooperation of others. And gaining this support.and cooperation 
of others requires leadership ability. Success and the ability to 
lead others-that is, getting them to do things they wouldn't do 
if they were not led-go hand in hand. 
The success-producing principles explained in the previous 
chapters are valuable equipment in helping you develop your 
leadership capacity. At this point we want to master four special 
leadership rules or principles that can cause· others ro do things 
for us in the executive suite, in business, in social clubs, in the 
home, anywhere we fmd people. 
These four leadership rules or principles are: 
1. Trade minds with the people you want to influence. 
2. Think: What is the human way to handle this? 

--- Page 282 ---
276 HOW TO THINK LIKE ALEADER 
3. Think progress, believe in progress, push for progress. 
4. Take time out to confer with yourself and develop your 
supreme thinking power. 
Practicing these rules produces re·sults. Putting them to use 
in everyday situations takes the mystery out of that gold-plated 
word, leadership: 
Let's see how; 
LEADERSHIP RULE NUMBER 1: TRADE MINDS 
WITH THE PEOPLE YOU WANT TO INFLUENCE. 
Trading minds with the people you want to influence is a magic 
way to get others-friends, associates. customers, employees-to 
act the way you want them to act. Study these two case histories 
and see why. 
Ted B. worked as a television copywriter and director for 
a large advertising agency. When the agency obtained a new 
account, a children's shoe manufacturer, Ted was assigned 
responsibility for developing several TV commercials. 
A month or so after the campaign had been launched, it 
became clear that the advertising was doing little or nothing to 
increase "product movement" in retail outlets. Attention was 
focused on the TV commercials, because in most cities only tele­
vision advertiSing was used. 
Through research of television viewers, they found that 
about 4 percent of the people thought it was simply a great com­
mercial, "one of the best," these 4 percent said. 
The remaining 96 percent were either indifferent to the 
commercials or. in plain language, thought they "smelled." 

--- Page 283 ---
HOWTOTHIHK L1KEALEADER 277 
Hundreds of comments like these were volunteered: "It's wacky. 
The rhythm sounds like a New Orleans band at 3 A.M." "My kids 
like to watch most TV commercials, but when that shoe thing 
comes on they go to the bathroom or refrigerator." "I think 
it's too uppity up." "Seems to me someone's trying to be too 
clever." 
Something especially interesting turned up when all the 
interviews were pnt together and analyzed. The 4 percent who 
liked the commercial were people pretty much like Ted in terms 
of income, education, sophistication, and interests. The remain­
ing 96 percent were definitely in a different socioeconomic 
class. 
Ted's commercials, which cost a lot of money, flopped 
because Ted thought only of his own interests. He had prepared 
the commercials thinking of the way he buys shoes, not the way 
the great majority buys shoes. He developed commercials that 
pleased him personally, not commercials that pleased the great 
bulk of the people. 
The results would have been much different had Ted pro­
jected himself into the minds of the masses of ordinary people 
and asked himself two questions: "If I were a parent, what kind 
of a commercial would make me want to buy those shoes?" "If I 
were a child, what kind of a commercial would make me go tell 
my Morn or Dad that I want those shoes?" 
Why Joan failed in retailing 
Joan is an intelligent, well-educated, attractive girl of twenty­
four. Fresh from college, Joan got a job as an assistant buyer 
in ready-to-wear goods at a low-to-medium-priced department 
store. She came highly recommended. "Joan has ambition, tal-

--- Page 284 ---
278 HOW TO THINK LIKE HEADER 
ent, and enthusiasm," one letter said. "She is certain to succeed 
in a big way." 
But Joan did not succeed in a "big way." Joan lasted only 
eight months and then quit retailing for other work. 
I knew her buyer well, and one day I asked him what hap­
pened. 
'Joan is a fine girl, and she has many fme qualities," he said. 
"But she had one major limitation." 
"What was that?" I asked. 
"Well, Joan was forever buying merchandise that she liked 
but most of our customers didn't. She selected styles, colors, 
materials, and prices she liked without putting herself in the 
shoes of the people who shop here. When I'd suggest to her that 
maybe a certain line wasn't right for us, she'd say, 'Oh, they'll 
love this. I do. I think this will move fast.' 
'Joan had been brought up in a well-to-do home. She had 
been educated to want quality. Price was not important to her. 
Joan just couldn't see clothing through the eyes of low-to-middle­
income people. So the merchandise she bought just wasn't suit­
able." 
The point is this: To get others to d~ .what you want them 
to do, you must see things through their eyes. When you trade 
minds, the secret of how to influence other people effuctively 
shows up. A very successful salesman friend told me he spends a 
lot of time anticipating how prospects will react to his presenta­
tion before he gives it. Trading minds with the audience helps 
the speaker design a more interesting, harder-hitting talk. Trading 
minds with employees helps the supervisor provide more effective, 
better received instructions. 

--- Page 285 ---
HOWTOTHIIIK UKEALEAOER 279 
A young credit executive explained to me how this tech­
nique worked for him. 
"When I was brought into 'this store [a medium-sized cloth­
ing store J as assistant credit manager, I was assigned the job of 
handling all collection correspondence. The collection letters the 
store had been using greatly disappointed me. They were strong, 
insulting, and threatening. I read them and thought, 'Brother, 
I'd be mad as hell if somebody sent me letters like these. I never 
would pay.' So I just got to work and started writing the kind of 
letter that would move me to pay an overdue bill if I received it. It 
worked. By putting myself in the shoes of the overdue customer, 
so to. speak, collections climbed to a record high." 
Numerous political candidates lose elections because they 
fail to look at themselves through the minds of the typical voters. 
One political candidate for a national office, apparently fully as 
qualified as his opponent, lost by a tremendous margin for one 
single reason. He used a vocabulary that only a small percentage 
of the voters could understand. 
His opponent, on the other hand, thought in terms of the 
voters' interests. When he talked to farmers, he used their lan­
guage. When he spoke to factory workers, he used words they 
were easily familiar with. When he spoke on TV; he addressed 
himself to Mr. Typical Voter, not to Dr. College Professor. 
Keep this question in mind: 'What would I think of this if 
I exchanged places with the other person?" It paves the way to 
more successful action. 
Thinking of the interests of the people we want to influ­
en<ie is an excellent thought rule in every situation. A few years 
ago a small electronlcs manufacturer developed a fuse that would 

--- Page 286 ---
280 HOW TO THIfIK LIKE HEADER 
never blowout. The manufacturer priced the product to sell far 
$1.25 and then retained an advertising agency to promote it. 
The account executive placed in charge of the advertis­
ing immediately became intensely enthusiastic. His plan was 
ta blanket the country with mass advertising on TV, radio, and 
newspapers. "This is it," he said. "We'll sell ten million the first 
year." His advisers tried to caution him, explaining that fuses are 
not a popular item, they have no romantic appeal, and people 
want to get by as cheaply as possible when they buy fuses. "Why 
not,". the advisors said, "use selected magazines and sell it to the 
,high income levels?" 
They were overruled, and the mass campaign was under 
way,lonly to be called off in six weeks because of "disappointing 
results." 
The trouble was this: the advertising executive looked at the 
high-priced fuses with his eyes, the eyes of a high-income person. 
He failed to see the product through the eyes of the mass market 
income levels. Had he put himself in their position, he would 
have seen the wisdom of directing the promotion toward the 
upper income groups and the account would have been saved. 
Develop your power to trade minds with the people you 
want to influence. The exercises belaw will help. 
PRACTICE TRADING MINDS EXERCISES 
FOR BEST RESULTS, 
SITUATION ASK YOURSELF 
1. Giving someone work instruc- "Looking at this from the view-
tions point of someone who is new 
ta this, have I made myself 
clear?" 

--- Page 287 ---
SITUATION 
2. Writing an advertisement 
3, Telephone manners 
4. Gift 
5. The way I give orders 
6. Child discipline 
7. My appearance 
8. Preparing a speech 
9, Entertainment HOWTO THIIIK LIKE A LEADER 281 
FOR BEST RESULTS, 
ASK YOURSELF 
"If I were a typical prospective 
buyer, how would I react to 
this ad?" 
"If I were thc'other person, 
what would I think of my 
telephone voi~e and Inan­
nets?" 
"Is this gift something I would 
like, or is it something he will 
like?" (often there is an enor­
mous difference) 
"Would I like to carry out orders 
if they were given to me the 
way I give them to others?" 
"If I were the child-considering 
his age, experience. and cmo­
tions-how would I react to 
this discipline?" 
"What would I think of my 
superior if he were dressed 
like me?" 
"Considering the background 
and interests of the audience, 
what would I think of this 
remark?" 
"If I were my guests, what kinds 
of food, music, and entertain­
ment would I like best?" 
Put the trading minds principle to work for you 

--- Page 288 ---
282 HOWTOTHINK LlKEALEADER 
1. Consider the other person's situation. Put yourself in his 
shoes, so to speak. Remember, his interests, income, intelli­
gence, and background may differ considerably from yours. 
2. Now ask yourself, "If I were in his situation, how would I 
react to this?" (Whatever it is you want him to do.) 
3. Then take the action that would move you if you were the 
other person. 
LEADERSHIP RULE NUMBER 2: 
THINK: WHATIS THE HUMAN WAY 
TO HANDLE THIS? 
People use different approaches to leadership situations. One 
approach is to assume the position of a dictator. The dictator 
makes all decisions without consulting those affected .. He refuses 
to hear his subordinates' side of a question because, down deep 
perhaps, he's afraid the subordinate might be right an.d this 
would cause him to lose face. 
Dictators don't last long. Employees may fake loyalty for 
a while, but unrest soon develops. Some of the best employees 
leave, and those remaining get together and plot against the 
tyrant. The result is that the organization ceases to function 
smoothiy. This puts the dictator in a bad light with his superior. 
A second leadership technique is the cold, mechanical, I'm­
a-rule-book-operator approach. The fellow using this approach 
handles everything exactly according to the book. He doesn't 
recognize that every rule or policy or plan is only a gnide for 
the usual cases. This would-be ·leader treats human beings as 

--- Page 289 ---
HOW TO THINK LIKE HEADER 283 
machines. And of all things people don't like, perhaps the most 
disliked is being treated like a machine. The cold, impersonal 
efficiency expert is not an ideal. The "machines" that work for 
him develop only part of their energy. 
Persons who rise to tremendous leadership heights use a 
third approach that we call "Being Human." 
Several years ago I worked closely with John S., who is 
an executive in the erigineering development section of a large 
aluminum manufacturer. John had mastered the 'be-human" 
approach and was enjoying its rewards .. In dozens of little ways 
John made his actions say, "You are a human being. I respect you. 
I'm here to help you in every way I can." 
When an individual fi'om another city joined his depart­
ment, John went to considerable personal inconvenience to help 
him fmd suitable housing. 
Working through his secretary and two other women 
employees, he set up office birthday parties for each member of 
the staff. The thirty minutes or so required for this was not a cost; 
rather, it was an investment in getting loyalty and output. 
When he learned that one of his staff members belonged 
to a minority faith, John called him in and explained that he 
would arrange for him to observe his religiOUS holidays that 
don't coincide with the more common holidays. 
When an employee or someone in the employee's family 
was ill, John remembered. He took time to compliment his staff 
individually for their off-the-job accomplishments. 
But the largest evidence of John's be-human philosophy 
showed up in the way he handled a dismissal problem. One 
of the employees who had been hired by John's predecessor 
simply lacked the aptitude and interest for the work involved. 

--- Page 290 ---
284 HOWTOTHIlIK LIKE A LEADER 
John handled the problem magnificently. He did not use the 
conventional procedure of calling the employee into his office 
and giving him, first, the bad news and then, second, fifteen or 
thirty days to move out. 
Instead, he did two unusual things. First, he explained why 
it would be to the employee's personal advantage to find a new 
situation where his aptitudes and inter~sts would be more useful. 
He worked with the employee and put him in touch with a repu­
table vocational guidance consultant. Next, he did something 
else above and beyond the call of duty. He helped the employee 
fmd a new job by setting up interviews with executives in other 
companies where the employee's skills were needed. In just 
eighteen days after the" dismissal" conference the employee was 
relocated in a very promising situation. 
This dismissal procedure intrigued me, so I asked John to 
explain his thinking behind it. He explained it this way: "There's 
an old maxim I've formed and held in my mind," he began. 
"Whoever is under a man's power is under his protection, too. 
We never should have hired this man in the first place because 
he's not cut out for this kind of work. But since we did, the least 
I could do was help him to relocate. 
'~ybody," John continued, "can hire a man. But the test 
of leadership is how one handles the dismissal. By helping that 
employee relocate before he left us built up a feeling of job secu­
lity in everyone in my department. I let them know by example 
that no one gets dumped on the street as long as I'm here." 
Make no mistake. John's be-human brand of leadership paid 
off. There were no secret gossip sessions about John. He received 
unquestioned loyalty and support.. He had maximum job seculity 
because he gave maximum job seculity to his subordinates. 

--- Page 291 ---
HOWTO THINK LIKE HEADER 285 
For about fifteen years I've been close to a fellow I'll call 
Bob W. Bob is in his late fifties. He came up the hard way. With 
a hit-or-miss education and no money, Bob found himself out of 
work in 1931. But he's always been a scrambler. Not one to be 
idle, Bob started an upholstery shop in his garage. Thanks to his 
untiring efforts, the business grew, and today it's a modern furni­
ture manufacturing plant with over three hundred employees. 
Today Bob is a millionaire. Money and material things have 
ceased to be a concern. But Bob is rich in other ways too. He's a 
millionaire in friends, contentment, and satisfaction. 
Of Bob's many fine qualities, his tremendous desire to help 
other people stands out. Bob is human and he's a specialist in 
treating others the way human beings want to be treated . 
. One day Bob and I were discussing the matter of Criticizing 
people. Bob's human way of doing it is a master formula. Here's 
the way he put it. "I don't think you could fmd anybody who would 
say I'm a softie or a weakling. I run a business. When something 
isn't going right, I fix it. But it's the way I fix it-that's important. 
If employees are doing something \vmng or are making a mistake, 
I am doubly careful not to hurt their feelings and make them feel 
small or embarrassed. I just use four simple steps: 
"First, I talk to them privately. 
"Second, I praise them for what Ihey are doing well. 
"Third, I point out the one thing at the moment that they 
could do better and I help them find the way. 
"Fourth, I praise them again on their good points . 
. '1\nd this four-step formula works. When I do it this way; 
people thank me because I've found that's exactly the way they 
like it. When they walk out of this office, they have been reminded 
that they are not oniy pretty good, they can be even better. 

--- Page 292 ---
286 HOW TO THIlIK LIKE HEADER 
'Tve been betting on people all my life," Bob says. 'Jilld the 
better I treat them, the more good things happen to me. I hon­
estly don't plan it that way. That's just the way it works out. 
"Let me give you an example. Back about, oh, five or six 
years ago, one of the production men came to work drunk. 
Pretty soon there was a commotion in the plant. It seems this fel­
low had taken a five-gallon can of lacquer and was splashing it all 
over the place. Well, the other workmen took the lacquer away 
from him, and the plant superintendent escorted him out. 
"I walked outside and found him sitting against the building 
in a kind of stupor. I helped him up, put him in my car, and took 
him to his home. His wife was frantic. I tried to reassure her that 
everything would be all right. 'Oh, but you don't understand,' 
she said. 'Mr. W. [me J doesn't stand for anyone being drunk on 
the job. Jim's lost his job, and now what will we do?' I told her 
Jim wouldn't be dismissed. She asked how I knew. The reason, I 
explained, is because I'm Mr. W. 
"She almost fainted. I told her I'd do all I could to help Jim 
at the plant and I hoped she'd do all she could at home; and just 
have him on the job in the morning. 
"When I got back to the plant, I went down to Jim's depart­
ment and spoke to Jim's co-workers. I told them, 'You've seen some­
thing unpleasant here today; but I want you to forget it. Jim will be 
back tomorrow: Be kind to him. He's been a good worker for a long 
time, and we owe it to him to give him another chance: 
'Jim got back on the ball, and his drinking was never again 
a problem. I soon forgot about the incident. But Jim didn't. Two 
years ago the headquarters of the local union sent some men 
here to negotiate the contract for the local. Thl'Y had some 
staggering, simply unrealistic demands. Jim-quiet, meek Jim-

--- Page 293 ---
HOW TO THINK LIKE ALEAOER 287 
suddenly became a leader. He got busy and reminded the fellows 
in the plant that they'd always gotten a fair deal from Mr. W. and 
we didn't need outsiders coming to tell us how to run our affairs. 
"The outsiders left, and as usual we negotiated our contract 
like fi'iends, thanks to Jim." 
Here are two ways to use the be-human approach to make 
you a better leader. First, each time you face a difficult matter 
involving people, ask yourself, "What is the huma1l way to ha1ldle 
this?" 
Ponder over this question when there is a disagreement 
among your subordinates or when an employee creates a prob­
lem. 
Remember Bob w.'s formula for helping others correct 
their mistakes. Avoid sarcasm. Avoid being cynical. Avoid taking 
people down a peg or two. Avoid putting others in their place. 
Ask, "What is the human way to deal with' people?" It 
always pays~sometimes sooner, sometimes later, but it always 
pays. 
A second way to profit from the be-human rule is to let 
your actio1l show YOIL put people first. Shmv interest in your subordi­
nates' off-the-job accomplishments. Treat everyone with dignity. 
Remind yourself that the primary purpose in life is to enjoy it. As 
a general rule, the more interest you show in a person, the more 
he will produce for you. And his production is what carries you 
forward to greater and greater success. 
Praise your subordinates to your supervisor by putting in 
plugs for them at every opportunity. It's an old American custom 
to admire the fellow who's on the side of the little man. Your 
subordinates will appreciate your plugs, and their loyalty to you 
will grow. And do not fear that this will lower your own imp or-

--- Page 294 ---
2BB HOW TO THIlIK LIKE HEADER 
tance in the eyes of your supervisor. Rather, a man big enough to 
be humble appears more confident than the insecure man who 
feels compelled to call attention to his accomplishments. A litde 
modesty goes a long way. 
Praise your subordinates personally at every opportunity. 
Praise them for their cooperation. Praise them for every extra 
effort they put forth. Praise is the greatest single incentive you 
can give people, and it costs you nothing. Besides, a write-in 
vote has often overthrown a powerful, known candidate. You 
never know when your subordinates can do you a turn by com­
ing to your defense. 
Practice praising people. 
Rub people the right way. Be human. 
LEADERSHIP RULE NUMBER 3: THINK PROGRESS, 
BELIEVE IN PROGRESS, PUSH FOR PROGRESS. 
One of the most complimentary things anyone can say about 
you is "He stands for progress. He's the man for the job." 
Promotions in all fields go to individuals who believe 
in-and push for-progress. Leaders, real leaders, are in short 
supply. Status-quo-ers (the everything's-all-right-Iet's-don't-upset­
the-apple-cart folks) far outnumber the progressives (the there's­
lots-of-room-for-improvement-Iet's-get-to-work-and-do-it-better 
people). Join the leadership elite. Develop a forward look. 
There are two special things you can dolo develop 
your progressive outlook: 
1. Think improvement in everything you do. 
Z. Think high standards in everything you do. 

--- Page 295 ---
HOWTO THIIIK LIKE ALEADER 289 
Several months ago the president of a medium-sized com­
pany asked' me to help him make an important decision. This 
executive had built the business by himself and .had been func­
tioning as sales manager. Now, with seven salesmen employed, 
he decided his next step was to promote one of his salesmen 
to the job of sales manager. He narrowed the choice down to 
three, all of whom were about equal in experience and sales 
performance. 
My assignment was to spend one day in the field with each 
man and then report my views on which fellow seemed to be best 
quallfied to lead the group. Each man was told that a consultant 
would wit him to discuss the overall marketing program. For obvi­
ous reasons, they were not told the specific purpose of my visit. 
1\vo of the men reacted pretty much the same way. Both 
were uncomfortable with me. They seemed to sense that I was 
there to "change things." Each of these men was a real defender 
of the status quo. Both approved of the way everything was 
being done. I raised questions about how the territories were 
laid out, the compensation program, the sales promotional 
material--every facet of the marketing effort. But on all points, 
the response was always "Everything-is okay." On specific points 
these two men explained why the present way couldn't and 
shouldn't be changed. Summed up, both men wanted the status 
quo to remain the status quo. One of them said to me as he 
dropped me by my hotel, "I don't know exactly why you spent 
the day with me, but tell Mr. M. for me that everything is okay 
as is. D.on't go refiguring anything." 
The third man was wonderfully different. He was pleased 
with the company and proud of its growth. But he was not 
wholly content. He wanted improvements. All day this third 

--- Page 296 ---
290 HOWTO THIIIK LIKE A LEADER 
salesman gave me his ideas for getting new business, pt:0viding 
better service to customers, reducing wasted time, revising the 
compensation plan to give more incentive, all so that he-and 
the con;pany-woulq make more. He had mapped out a new 
advertising campaign he had been thinking about. When I left 
him, his parting remark was "I sure appreciate the chance to tell 
someone about some of my ideas. We've got a good outfit, but I 
believe we can make it better." 
My recommendation, of course, was for the third man. It 
was a recommendation that coincided perfectly with the feelings 
of the company president. Believe in expansion, efficiency; new 
products, new processes, better schools, increased prosperity. 
Believe in-and push for-progress; and you'll be a leader! 
As a youngster, I had an opportunity to see how the differ· 
ent thinking of two leaders can make an amazing difference in 
the performance of followers. 
I attended a country elementary school: eight grades, 
one teacher, and forty children all jammed together inside four 
I brick walls. A new teacher was always a big deal. Led by the big 
boys-the seventh· and eighth·graders-the pupils set out to see 
how much they could get away With: 
One year there was little more than chaos. Every day there 
were dozens of the usual school pranks, "wars" of spitballs, and 
paper airplanes. Then the.re were the major incidents such as 
locking the teacher outside the schooHor half a day at a time, 
or on another occasion the opposite, barricading her. within the 
building for hours. Another day each boy in the upper grades 
brought his dog into the schoolroom. 
Let me add that these children were not delinquents. 
Stealing, physical violence, and deliberate harm were not their 

--- Page 297 ---
HOWTOTHINK LlKEALEAOER 291 
objectives. They were healthy kids conditioned by vigorous rural 
living and needing an outlet for their tremendous pent-up energies 
and ingenuities. 
Well, the teacher somehow managed to stay with the 
school until the end of that year. To no one's surprise, there was 
a new teacher the following September. 
The new teacher extracted strikingly different performance 
from the children. She appealed to their personal pride and sense 
of respect. She encouraged them to develop judgment. Each 
child was assigned a specific responsibility like washing black­
boards or cleaning erasers, or practicing paper grading for the 
younger grades. The new teacher found creative ways to use the 
energy that had been so misdirected a few months before. Her 
educational program was centered on building character. 
Why did the children act like young devils one year and like 
young angels the next? The difference was the leader, their teacher. 
In all honesty, we cannot blame the kids for playing pranks an 
entire school year. In each instance the teacher set the. pace. 
The first teacher, deep down, didn't care whether the chil­
dren made progress. She set no goals for the children. She didn't 
encourage them. She couldn't control her temper. She didnt like 
teaching, so the pupils didn't like learning. 
But the second teacher had high, positive standards. She sin­
cerely liked the children and wanted them to accomplish much. 
She considered each one as an individual. She obtained discipline 
easily because in everything she did, she was well disciplined. 
And in each case, the pupils adjusted their conduct to fit the 
examples set by the teachers. 
We find this same form of adjustmenttakingplace every day 
in adult groups. During World War II military chiefs continually 

--- Page 298 ---
292 HOW TO THINK lIKEALEADER 
observed that the highest morale was not found in units where 
commanders were "easy," "relaxed," and "lackadaisical." Crack 
units were led by officers with high standards who enforced mill-. 
tary regulations fairly and properly. Military personnel simply do 
not respect and admire officers with low standards. 
College students, too, take their cue from the examples set 
by the professors. Students under one professor cut classes, copy 
term papers, and connive in vadous ways to pass without serious 
study. But· the same students under another professor willingly 
work extra hard to master the subject. 
In business situations we again fmd individuals patterning 
their thinking after that of the supedor. Study a group of employ­
ees closely. Observe their habits, mannedsms, attitudes toward the 
company, ethics, selfcontrol. Then compare what you fmd with the 
behavior of their supedor, and you discover amazing similadties. 
Every year mahy corporations that have grown sluggish 
and are headed downward are rebuilt. And how? By changing 
a handful of executives at the top. Companies (and colleges and 
churches and clubs and unions and all other types of organiza­
tions) are successfully rebuilt from the top down, not from the 
bottom up. C~ange the thinking at the top, and you automati­
cally change the thinking at the bottom. 
Remember this: .when you take over the leadership of a 
group, the persons in that group immediately begin to adjust 
themselves to the standards you set. This is most noticeable dur­
ing the first few weeks. Their big concern is to clue you in, zero 
you in, find out what you expect of them. They watch every 
move you make. They think, how much rope will he give me? 
How does he want it done? What does it take to please him? 
What will he say if I do this or that? 

--- Page 299 ---
HOW TO THINK LIKE HEADER 293 
Once they know, they act accordingly. 
Check the example you set. Use this old but ever-accurate 
quatrain as a guide: 
What kind of world 
would this world be, 
If everyone in it 
were just like mel 
To add meaning to this self-imposed test, substitute the 
word company fQr world so it reads: 
What kind of company 
would this company be, 
If everyone in it 
were just like mel 
In similar fashion, ask yourself what kind of club, commu­
nity, school, church would it be If everyone in it acted like you. 
Think, talk, act, live the way you want your subordinates to 
think, talk, act, live-and they will. 
Over a period of time, subordinates tend to become carbon 
copies of their chief. The simplest way to get high-level perfor­
mance is to be sure the master copy is worth duplicating. 
Am I a Progressive Thinker? Checklist 
A. Do I Think Progressively Toward My Work? 
1. Do I appraise my work with the 'bow can we do it bet­
ter?" attitude? 
2. Do I praise my company, the people in it, and the prod­
ucts it sells at every possible opportunity? 

--- Page 300 ---
294 HOWTO THINK LIKE A LEADER 
3. Are my personal standards with reference to the quan­
tity and-quality of my output higher now than three or 
six mouths ago? 
4. Am I setting an excellent example for my subordinates, 
associates, and others I work with? 
B. Do I Think Progressively Toward My Family? 
1. Is my family happier today than it was three or six 
months ago? 
2. Am I following a plan to improve my family's standard of 
living? 
3. Does my family have an ample variety of stimulating 
activities outside the home? 
4. Do I set an example of "a progressive," a supporter of 
progress, for my children? 
C. Do I Think Progressively Toward Myselfl 
1. Can I honestly say I am a more valuable person today 
than three or six months ago? 
2. Am I following an organized self-improvement program 
to increase my value to others? 
3. Do I have forward-looking goals for at least five years in 
the future? 
4. Am I a booster in every organization or group to which 
I belong? 
D. Do I Think Progressively Toward My Community? 
1. Have I done anything in the past six months that I hon­
estly feel has improved my community (neighborhood, 
churches, schools, etc.)? 

--- Page 301 ---
HOW TO THINK LIKE A LEADER 295 
2. Do I boost worthwhile community projects rather than 
object, criticize, or complain? 
3. Have I ever taken the lead in bringing about some worth­
while improvement in my community? 
4. Do I speak well of my neighbors and fellow citizens? 
LEADERSHIP RULE .NUMBER 4: TAKE TIME OUT 
TO CONFER WITH YOURSELF AND TAP YOUR 
SUPREME THINKING POWER. 
We usually picture leaders as exceptionally busy people. And 
they are. Leadership requires being in the thick of things. But 
while it's usually overlooked, it is noteworthy tqat leaders 
spend considerable time alone, alone with nothing but their 
own thinking apparatus. 
Check the lives of the great religious leaders, and you'll 
fmd each of them spent considerable time alone. Moses fre­
quently was alone, often for long periods of time. So were Jesus, 
Buddha, Confucius, Mohammed, Gandhi--every outstanding 
religious leader in history spent much time in solitude, away 
fi'om the distractions of life . 
. Political leaders, too, those who made lasting names in his­
tory for good or bad, gained insight through solitude. It is an inter­
esting question whether Franklin D. Roosevelt could have devel­
oped his unusual leadership capacities had he not spent much time 
alone while recovering from his polio attack. Harry Truman spent 
much time as a boy and as an adult alone on a Missouri farm. 
Quite possibly Hitler would never have achieved power had 
he not spent months in jail alone, where he had time to construct 
Mein Kampf, that brilliantly wicked plan for world conquest that 
sold the Germans in a blind moment. 

--- Page 302 ---
296 HOW TO THIlIK LIKE HEADER 
Many of the leaders of communism who proved to be 
so diplomatically skillful-Lenin, Stalin, Mar;', and many oth~ 
ers-spent time in jail, where they could, without distraction, 
plan their future moves. 
Le~ding universities require professors to lecture as few as 
five hours per week so that the professor has time to think . 
. Many outstanding business executives are surrounded all 
day by assistants, secretaries, telephones, and reports. But follow 
them around for 168 hours a week and 720 hours a month, and 
you discover they spent a surprising amount of time in uninter~ 
rupted thought. 
The point is this: the successful person in any field takes 
time out to confer with himself or herself. Leaders use solitude 
. to put the pieces of a problem together, to work out solutions, to 
plan, and, in one phrase, to do their superthinking. 
Many people fail to tap their creative leadership power 
because they confer with everybody and everything else but them~ 
selves. You know this kind of person well. He's the fellow who goes 
to great lengths not to be alone. He goes to extremes to surround 
himself with people. He can't stand being alone in his office, so he 
goes prowling to see other people. Seldom does he spend evenings 
alone. He feels a compelling need to talk with others every waking 
moment. He devours a huge diet of small talk and gossip. 
When this person is forced by circumstances to be physi~ 
cany alone, he fmds ways to keep fi'om being mentally alone. 
At times like these he resorts to television, newspapers, radio, 
telephone, anything that will take over his thinking process for 
him. In effect he says, "Here, Mr. TV, Mr. Newspaper, occupy my 
mind for me. I'm afraid t6 occupy it with my own thoughts." 
Mr. I~can't~stand~to~be~alone shuns independent thought. 

--- Page 303 ---
HOWTO THINK LIKE A LEADER 297 
He keeps his own mind blacked out. He is, psychologically, 
scared of his own thoughts. As time goes by, Mr. I-can't-stand­
to-be-alone grows increasingly shallow. He makes many ill-con­
sidered moves. He fails to develop firmness of purpose, personal 
stability. He is, unfortunately, ignorant of the superpower lying 
unused just behind his forehead. 
Don't be a Mr. I-can't-stand-to-be-alone. Successful leaders 
tap their superpower through being alone. You can, too. 
Let's see hmv, 
As part of a professional development program I asked thirteen 
trainees to closet themselves for one hour each day for two weeks. 
The trainees were asked to shut themselves off from all distractions 
and think constructively about anything that came to mind. 
At the end of two weeks each trainee, without exception, 
reported the experience proved amazingly practical and worth­
while. One fellow stated that before the managed solitude 
experiment he was on the verge of a sharp break with another 
company executive, but through clear thinking he found 
the source of the problem and the way to correct it. Others 
reported that they solved problems relating to such varied 
things as changing jobs, marriage difficulties, buying a home, 
and selecting a college for a teenage child. 
Each trainee enthusiastically reported that he had gained a 
much better understanding of himself-his strengths and weak­
nesses-than he had ever had before .. 
The trainees also discovered something else that is tremen­
dously significant. They discovered that decisions and observations 
made alone in managed solitude have an uncanny way of being 100 
percent right! The trainees discovered that when the fog is lifted, 
the right choice becomes crystal clear. 

--- Page 304 ---
298 HOWTO THINK LIKE HEADER 
Managed solitude pays off. 
One day recently an associate of mine reversed her stand 
completely on a troublesome issue. I was curious to know why 
she had switched her thinking, since the problem was very basic. 
Her answer went like trus. "Well, I haven't been at all clear in my 
mind as to what we should do. So I got up at 3:30 trus morning, 
flXed a cup of coffee, and just sat on the sofa and thought until 
7 A.M. I see the whole matter a lot clearer now. So the only thing 
for me to do is reverse my stand." 
And her new s'tand proved completely correct. 
Resolve now to set aside some time each day (at least trutty 
minutes) to be completely by yourself. 
Perhaps early in the morning before anyone else is stirring 
about would be best for you. Or perhaps late in the evening would 
be a better time. The important tlUng is to select a time when your 
mind is fresh and when you can be free from distractions. 
You can use this time to do two types of trunking: directed 
and undirected. To do directed thinking, review the major prob­
lem facing you. In solitude your mind will study the problem 
objectively and lead you'to the right answer. 
To do undirected thinking, just let your mind select what 
it wishes to think about. In moments like these your subcon­
scious mind taps your memory bank, wruch in turn feeds your 
conscious mind. Undirected tlUnkingis very helpful in doing self­
evaluation. It helps you get down to the very basic matters like 
"How can I do better? What should be my next move?" 
Re'member, the main job of the leader is thinking. And the 
best preparation for leadersrup is trunking. Spend some time in 
managed solitude every day and tlUnk yourself to success. 

--- Page 305 ---
HOWTO THINK LIKE HEADER 299 
SUMMARY 
To be a more effective leader, put these four leader­
ship principles 10 work 
1. Trade minds with the people you want to influence. It's 
easy to get others to do what you want them to do if you'll 
see things through their eyes. Ask yourself this question 
before you act: "What would I think of this if I exchanged 
places with the other person)" 
2. Apply the "Be-Human" rule in your dealings with others. 
Ask, "What is the human way to handle this?" In everything 
you do, show that you put other people first. Just give other 
people the kind of treatment you like to receive. You'll be 
rewarded .. 
3. Think progress, believe in progress, push for progress. Think 
improvement in eve111:hing you do. Think higb standards in 
everything you do. Over a period of time subordinates tend to 
become carbon copies of their chief. Be sure the master copy is 
worth duplicating. Make this a personal resolution: '1\.t home, 
at work, in community life, if it's progress I'm for it." 
4. Take time out to confer with yourself and tap your supreme 
thinking power. Managed solitude pays off. Use it to release 
your creative power. Use it to find solutions to personal and 
business problems. So spend some time alone every day just 
for thinking. Use the thinking technique all great leaders 
use: confer with yourself. 

--- Page 306 ---
300 HOW TO THINK LIKE HEADER 
HOWTO USE THE MAGIC OF THINKING BIG IN 
LIFE'S MOST CRUCIAL SITUATIONS 
There is magic in thinking big. But it is so easy to forget. When 
you hit some rough spots, there is danger that your thinking will 
shrink in size. And when it does, you lose. 
Below are some brief guides for staying big when you're 
tempted to use the small approach. 
Perhaps you'll want to put these guides on small cards for 
even handier reference. 
A. When Little People Try to Drive You Down, THINI( BIG 
To be sure, there are some people who want you to lose, to expe· 
rience misfortune, to be reprimanded. But these people can't 
hurt you if you'll remember three things: 
1. You win when you refuse to fight petty people. Fighting 
little people reduces you to their size. Stay big. 
2. Expect to be sniped at. It's proof you're growing. 
3. Remind yourself that snipers are psychologically sick. Be 
Big. Feel sorry for them: 
Think Big Enough to be immune to the attacks of petty 
people. 
B. When That "I-Haven't-Got-What-It- Takes" Feeling 
Creeps Up on You, THINK BIG 
Remember: if you think you are weak, you are. If you think you're 
inadequate, you are. If you think you're second·class, you are. 
Whip that natural tendency to sell yourself short with 
these tools: 
1. Look important. It helps you think important. How you 

--- Page 307 ---
HOW TO THItlK LIKE HEADER 301 
look on the outside has a lot to do with how you feel on 
the inside. 
2. Concentrate on your assets. Build a sell-yourself-to­
yourself commercial and lise it. Learn to supercharge 
yourself. Know your positive self. 
3. Put other people in proper perspective. The other person 
is just another human being, so why be afraid of him? 
Think Big Enough to see how good you really are! 
C. When an Argument or Quarrel Seems Inevitable, THINK 
BIG. 
Successfully resist the temptation to argue and quarrel by: 
1. Asking yourself, "Honestly now, is this thing really 
important enough to argue about?" 
2. Reminding yourself, you never gain anything from an 
argument but you always lose something. 
Think Big Enough to see that quarrels, arguments, feuds, 
and fusses will never help you get where you want to go. 
D. When You Feel Defeated, THINK BIG. 
It is not possible' to achieve large success without hardships and 
setbacks. But it is possible to live the rest of your life without 
defeat. Big thinkers react to setbacks this way: 
1. Regard the setback as a lesson. Learn from it. Research 
it. Use it to propel you forward. Salvage something from 
every setback. 
2. Blend persistence with experimentation. Back off and 
start afresh with a new approach. 

--- Page 308 ---
302 HOW TO THINK LIKE HEADER 
Think Big Enough to see that defeat is a state of mind, 
nothing more. 
E. When Romance Starts to Slip, THINK BIG 
Negative, petty; "She's·(He's)·unfair·to·me·so·I'll·get·even" type of 
thinking slaught~rs romance, destroys the affection that can be yours. 
Do this when thihgs aren't going right in the love department: 
l. Concentrate on the biggest qualities in the person you 
want to love you. Put little things where they belong-in 
second place. 
2. Do something special for your mate-and do it often. 
Think Big Enough to fmd the secret to marital joys. 
F. When You Feel Your Progress on the Job Is Slowing Down, 
THINI{ BIG 
No matter what you do and regardless of your occupation, 
higher status, higher pay come from one thing: increasing the 
quality and quantity of your output. Do this: 
Think, "I can do better." The best is not unattainable. There 
is room for doing everything better. Nothing in this world is 
being done as well as it could be. And when you think, "I can do 
better," ways to do better will appear. Thinking "I can do better" 
switches on your creative power. 
Think Big Enough to see that if you put service first, 
money takes care of itself. 
In the words of Publilius Syrus: 
A wise man will be master of his mind, 
A fool will be its slave. 

--- Page 309 ---
INDEX 
actions 
attitudes affected by, 68-69 
fear cured by, 50-55, 221-23 
getting the habit, 212-34 
getting started, 223-26 
taking the initiative, 221~28 
thoughts control, 135 
See also Initiative 
advertising, 208 
use of psychology in, 60 
advice, £i:om successful people, 
152,155,156 
age excusitis, 39-45 
Alvarez, Walter, 31 
appearance, 127-32 
buying quality clothes, 131 
looking important, 127-32, 144 
thinking affected by, 127-32 
applicants, screening. 62 
appreciation, showing, 179-82 
arguments, avoiding, 300, 301 
attitudes, 166-91 
activating one's self, 168 
adding "life" to, 173-74 
appraising, 166-67 
broadcasting good news, 
175-77 
developing, 168 
. of employees, 132-38 
enthusiastic, 169-77 expressed in voice and actions, 
167-68 
j·can·do·better, 111-12, 125 
importance of good, 30--31, 
36·37, 168 
as more important than 
intelligence, 39 
negative, 33, 34-35, 55, 56-62, 
147-55 
showing appreciation, 179-82 
that bring success, 166-91 
Barrymore, Lionel, 241 
belief in success, 9-24, 100-105 
developing the power of, 20--24 
driving force of, 12-14 
importance of thinking "big," 
14-15 
Bender, James F., 174 
big, thinking. See Thinking, big 
books and periodicals, 272 
boredom,_ overcoming, 157-61, 
169-70,260 
bull sessions, 162 
Burch, George E., 263 
business, value of repeat, 85-86 
careers, selecting, 252-60 
Civil Aviation Administration, 
238, 239, 245 

--- Page 310 ---
304 INDEX 
clothes, buying quality, 131 
Coca Cola, 142 
colleges 
desire for education, 103-5 
investing in, 270--72 
recruiting graduates, 75-76 
community work, 115 
compliments, 81-82, 179-82 
concentration, technique for 
aiding, 226 
confidence 
acquiring, 50 
action used to gain, W-12,221-23 
avoid negative thoughts, 55, 
56-57, 199-203 
building, 49-74 
daily pep talks, 139-41 
guilt feelings destroy, 65-68 
practice making eye contact, 
69-70 
smile big, 72-73 
speaking-up, 71-72 
use of positive thoughts, 56-57 
walking faster, 70-71 
congratulations. offering, 195 
conscience, practice doing what is 
right, 65-68 
consumer research, 11i, 230--31 
conversation 
avoiding gossip, 161-63 
letting others talk, 207-9 
stimulating, 157-61, 162 
Conwell, Russell H., 186 
Cordiner, Ralph]., 21-22, 271 
courage, developing, 141 
courtesy, 209 Crane; George w., 68 
creative thinking, 100-125 
associating with stimulating 
people, 119-24, 125 
belief in the solution, 100-105 
danger of traditional thinking, 
107-8 
defInition, 100-101 
increasing one's output, 109-16 
practice asking and listening, 
116-19,125 
receptive to new ideas, 105-9 
self-improvement, 109-12, 125 
criticism, constructive, 135,244, 
251 
crusaders, 231-32 
customers 
developing loyal, 110, 180, 
203-5 
giving extra service, 187-90 
value of, 84-86 
decision-making, 116-17,297-98 
defeat 
constructive criticism, 251 
getting a fresh start, 249-50 
overcoming, 235-51 
study setbacks, 237-46 
desire, when harnessed, is powel~ 
258 
desponde~cy, overcoming. 73 
diabetes, 29-30 
diet-consciousness, 146 
dig-into-it-deeper technique, 
for d~veloping enthusiasm, 
171-73 

--- Page 311 ---
disappointments, handling, 209-10 
door-to-door selling, 224 
dreaming creatively, 100-125 
du Pont Company, 106 
Edison, Thomas Alva, 247 
education, investing in, 103-6, 
270-72 
efficiency, increasing mental, 
249-50 
Einstein, Albert, 37 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 26, 249 
emotions, actions, can change, 
68-<>9 
employees 
'De-human" technique, 282~88 
complimenting, 177-82 
counseling, 97, 119-20 
dismissal procedures, 283..,..84 
first-class treatment for, 205-6 
imitate supervisors, 292-93 
shortage of persons for key 
positions, 212 
enthusiasm 
broadcasting good news, 
175-77 
developing power of, 33, 37, 
138-39,177-82 
dig-into-it-deeper tedmique, 
171-73, 191 
"life" up everything, 173-74, 
191 
environment, 146-65 
avoid gossiping, 161-63 
avoid small-thinking people, 
147, 157-61 INDEX 305 
circulating in stimulating 
groups, 157-<>1, 162 
fighting suppressive influences 
in, 149-51 
getting advice fi:om successful 
people, 152, 155, 156 
mind reflects, 146-47 
pitfalls in work, 153-55 
psychological, 147-48 
evaluation, se1f-, 76-78 
excusitis 
age,39-45 
curing, 25--48 
health, 26, 27-32 
intelligence, 32-39 
luck, 45--48 
executives, 257-58 
eyes, practice of making eye 
contact, 69-70 
failures 
causes of, 13-14,34-37 
due to lack of belief, 13-14, 
34-37 
excusitis, 25-48 
fear of, 150 
Fairless, Benjamin, 209-10 
families 
finding time for, 184-86 
responsibilities, 184-86 
faults, correcting, 243-44 
fear 
action cures, 50--55, 221-23 
conquering, 49-74 
of failures, 150 
isolating, 55 

--- Page 312 ---
306 INOEX 
fear (co11t.) 
psychological problem, 49-50, 
60,61 
feelings 
unpleasant, 58-62 
See also Attitudes 
first·class, going, 146-<>5,256-62 
Ford, Henry, 37 
Ford Motor Company, 109 
Franklin, Benjamin, 162,227 
friends, 194-99 
making new, 157-61, 196-99 
selecting, 118 
stimulating, 157-(:il 
General Electric Company, 21-22, 
111,271 
General Motors, 47 
gifts, power of thoughtful, 
184-86, 196 
goals, 252-74 
achieving, 258--{i0 
of companies, 253, 254 
definition, 252 
detours from, 269-70 
forward planning, 253-56, 
26CH52,263 
one step at a time, 260-62, 
264--{i7 
planning for the future, 87-88 
power of, 259-63 
selecting ~areer, 253-60 
setting, 254-56, 267 
ten-year plan, 254-56 
thirty-day improvement guide, 
268--{i9 used to get things done, 26CH53 
going first-class, 146-<>5, 256-<>2 
Good Humor Company, 252 
Gordon, Le\v, 264 
gussip, avoiding, 161-63 
Greenewalt, Crawford H" 106 
groups 
circulating in new; 121-22, 157--{il 
meetings, 117 
guilt feelings, 65--{i8 
Habits 
acquiring new, 268-70 
breaking bad, 266 
handshakes, 173 
handicaps, 30-31 
Hattwick, Melvin S., 60 
health,26, 27-38 
as an excuse, 26, 27-32 
attitude toward, 26 
avoid talking about, 31 
avoid worry; 31 
emotionally induced illness, 26, 
28 
Hitler, Adolf, 295 
Hubbard, Orville, 245-46 
ideas 
acting up, 212-23 
from association with 
stimulating people, 122-24 
being receptive to ne,v, 105-9 
investing in idea starters, 272-73 
listing, 122-23 
mechanical means of creating. 
223-26 

--- Page 313 ---
presenting constructive, 
228-29 
putting in writing, 122-24 
sources of, 272-73 
ways of developing, 122-24 
imitation, pmyer of, 137, 139 
importance, feeling of, 135-38 
improving one's self, 109-12, 
266-67 
individuals, importance of, 
177-85 
initiative 
developing, 228-34 
importance of, 17 
taking, 221-30 
insurance, selling, 203-5 
intelligence 
attitude more important than, 
32-39 
excusitis, 32-39 
knO\vledge is power, 37-38 
"stickability,". 33 
introductions, 197-98 
investments, 242 
in books and periodicals, 272 
in education, 270--72 
jobs 
attitudes of subordinates, 
137-38 
attitudes toward, 132-38, 144-45 
increasing capacity for work, 
109-17, 125 
power of imitation, 137, 139 
rule for getting ahead in, 115, 
133-34 INDEX 307 
shortage of people for key, 156, 
212 
Johnson, Lyndon, 194 
Kennedy, John E, 26 
key jobs, shortage of people for, 
156, 212 
knowledge, power of, 37-38 
Lane, Mills, Jr., 176 
leadership, 21-22, 116, 197, 
275-302 
attitude for top, 91 
'be-human" approach, 282-88 
principles of, 275-302 
taking time to think, 295-98 
thinking big, 10-12, 14,288-95 
letters, to new friends, 199 
listening, learning by asking and, 
116-19, 125,208 
looking important, 127-32, 145 
luck, setbacks blamed on, 45-48, 
245-46 
McKinsey Foundation for 
Management Research, 257-58 
Mahoney, Dave, 252 
management tr~ining programs, 
21-24,116-19,297-98 
marketing research, 230-31 
mediocrity, causes of, 246, 262 
meetings, speaking at, 71-72, 117 
memory. 38 
mismanaged, 56-57 
store only positive thoughts, 
56-62 

--- Page 314 ---
308 IllOEX 
mental stimulation, 119-24, 125 
mind 
creative thinking, 100-125 
mental bro,adcasting station, 
201-3 
money, desire to make, 186--90, 
191 
Mulcahey, Alice, 58-59 
Murrow, Edward R., 221-22 
names, remembering, 180, 182, 
194, 198-99 
National Sales Executive~, Inc., 119 
negative thoughts, avoiding, 55. 
56-62, 147-55, 199-203 
news, broadcasting only good, 
175-77 
observation, importance of, 23-24 
optimism, developing, 177 
Penney, J. C., 67 
people 
acquiling balanced view of, 
62-63 
associating with stimulating. 
119-24, 125, 157-61, 162' 
conquering fear of, 61-74 
differences in, 199-201 
influencing, 275-82 
negative, 147-55 
thinking right toward, 193 
trading minds with, 275, 276--82 
pep talks, daily, 139-44, 145 
persistence, 237, 246--50, 251 
personal efficiency; increasing. 112-17,125,132-37 
Pi Sigma Epsilon, 264 
Polk, Sol, 205 
positive thinking, power of, 
17-19,56--58, 77-82 
praise, desire for, 182-85, 285, 
287-88 
prestige, desire fur, 177 
problem solving, 38, 216--21, 24&-50 
professional organizations, 
membership in, 121-22 
progressive outlook, developing, 
105-9,288-95 
public speaking, 71-72, 91-92, 174 
quality, instincr fur, 164 
quarrels, avoiding, 92-93, 96, 300, 
301 
questions, asking, 116--19 
raises, obtaining. 188-89 
rationalization, 149-50 
real estate, selling, 82-84, 12()-21 
recognition, ,desire for, 177 
Red Cross, 170 
respect, winning. 126--32 
responsibilities, taking on 
additional,113-16 
,retirements, 263-64 
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 26, 295 
salesmanship, 95, 96, 176 
Schell, Erwin H., 168 
Schindler, John A., 28 
secretaries, 135. 179-80, 190 
security; desire for, 75 

--- Page 315 ---
selfdepreciation, 21, 22, 76-77, 259 
self-improvement, plan for, 
109-12, 125,268-73 
service, giving, 186-90, 191 
Sevareid, Eric, 265-66 
shyness, 55-74 
smiles, big, 72-73, 174, 181 
solitude, thinking in, 295-98 
speaking in public, 71-72, 91-92, 
174,228-29 
Stevens, Rise, 243-44 
strangers, speaking to, 197-99 
stuttering, 94-95 
success 
attitudes for, 9-24, 166-91 
belief in, 9-24, 148-51 
support and cooperation of 
others, 192-211,275,286-87 
thinking big, 24-28, 77, 142-44 
suicide, 58-59 
talking, 173-77,207-9 
team efforts, 91 
telephoning, 139-40, 199 
Teller, Edward, 33 
tensions, 49 
thank yous, 174 
thinking 
adding values, 82-89 
belief that a solution is 
possible, 101-3 
big, 75-99 
concentrating on one's assets, 77 
creative, 100-125 
developing ability; 38, 297-98 
effect of appearance on, 127-32 IIlDEX 309 
focus on big objectives, 91-98 
like a leader, 275-82 
negative, 36, 91-98, 201-2, 203 
about one's job, 89-91 
power of positive, 17-19, 
56-58, 77-82 
progressive, 288-95 
in solitude, 295-98 
subconscious mind, 298 
times for, 298 
traditional, 105-9 
upgrading, 144-45 
vocabulary, 77-82 
traditional thinking, 105-9 
training programs 
in self-development, 21-24 
thinking in solitude, 297-98 
Truman, Harry S, 26, 295 
value, adding values to things, 
people, 82-89 
vocabulary of big thinkers, 77-82 
volunteers, 232-33 
walking, fast, 70-71 
Wall Street Journal, 272-73 
Wanamaker, John, 212, 258 
Williams, W Colvin, 241-42 
wives, 156-59, 184-86 
work 
increasing one's capacity; 
109-17,125 
thinking job is important, 
132-37, 144-45 
worry; overcoming, 31, 49 
writers and writing, 24&--47 

--- Page 316 ---


--- Page 317 ---


--- Page 318 ---


